This is the operational bot account used for automated maintenance on shinto.miraheze.org, it is also used on lifeism.miraheze.org and aelaki.miraheze.org

Its purpose is to run repeatable cleanup and migration tasks with transparent logging, persistent state files, and auditable edit summaries tied to GitHub Actions workflow runs.

Repository: https://github.com/EmmaLeonhart/shintowiki-scripts

Dashboard: https://emmaleonhart.github.io/shintowiki-scripts/

Run manually: https://github.com/EmmaLeonhart/shintowiki-scripts/actions/workflows/cleanup-loop.yml

== Operations policy ==

All routine bot edits run through '''GitHub Actions''', not from a local machine. Scripts are committed to the repository and triggered automatically or via manual dispatch. Local runs are only used for emergencies.

=== Rate limiting and server-load policy (updated 2026-04-18) ===

In response to recently raised concerns about Miraheze server load, this bot has been tightened as follows:

* '''Inter-edit throttle raised from 1.5s to 2.5s''' across every script that writes to <code>shinto.miraheze.org</code> (43 scripts, single constant <code>THROTTLE = 2.5</code>). This reduces the sustained edit rate from ~40/minute to ~24/minute.
* '''Bounded per-run work.''' Every long-walking script has a state file and a <code>--max-edits</code> cap (typically 100–300); runs resume from state rather than re-scanning from scratch, so Miraheze does not pay the cost of repeat namespace walks.
* '''Bail-on-429 for Wikidata / SPARQL''' (policy 2026-03-28). Scripts that hit the Wikidata API or WDQS do not retry on HTTP 429 — they terminate, and the next scheduled run picks up where state left off. A narrow exception (2026-03-29) uses exponential backoff for the QS generators that legitimately need >20 SPARQL queries in one pass.
* '''No new full-namespace walks''' will be added to the cleanup loop without a state file and a justification against the server-load constraint.

Any new script added to the pipeline must follow the same template: <code>mwclient</code>, <code>THROTTLE = 2.5</code>, stateful with <code>--max-edits</code>/<code>--run-tag</code>, and graceful behaviour under 429.

== Immediate / in progress ==
<!-- BOT-IMMEDIATE:START -->
<!-- BOT-IMMEDIATE:END -->

== Tasks ==

Active short-horizon work queue lives in the repository's [https://github.com/EmmaLeonhart/shintowiki-scripts/blob/main/status.md status.md] (Sutra-style queue — items deleted when done, not checkmarked). Longer-horizon backlog lives in [https://github.com/EmmaLeonhart/shintowiki-scripts/blob/main/todo.md todo.md].

=== Currently automated (runs every 24h via the cleanup loop) ===

Structural and categorization cleanup:
* enwiki XML reimport of erroneous-transclusion pages
* wanted-category stub creation
* categorization of uncategorized categories and pages
* EmmaBot category triage (enwiki → jawiki → secondary → single-member bucket)
* unused-template deletion
* double-redirect and broken-redirect fixes
* <code>&lt;noinclude&gt;</code> fix on templates carrying categories or wikidata-link transclusions
* untranslated-Japanese tagging with bucketed character-count categories
* talk-page migration seeded from ja / en / simple Wikipedia
* duplicate QID disambiguation resolution (easy redirect case)
* crud category stripping

Wikidata integration:
* P11250 (Miraheze article ID) QuickStatements — generate, fetch from wiki, submit daily, clean once accepted
* P958 (section) qualifier generation and daily submission
* P459 (determination method) qualifier application via direct API
* remove P31 = Shikinaisha from items already carrying P31 = Shikinai Ronsha

Bookkeeping: bot userpage status markers at start/end of each run, full run-history dashboard page rebuilt per run.

=== Future tasks ===

* strip untranslated-character-count categories from pages now in [[:Category:Translated pages]]
* remove legacy <code>{{DEFAULTSORT:...}}</code> tags from mainspace
* extend P11250 QuickStatements generation to Template: and Category: namespaces
* translate the remaining pages in the repository's <code>need_translation/</code> queue
* audit [[:Category:Double category qids]] for members whose two targets are genuinely distinct working categories (needs human review)
* enrich [[:Category:Categories autocreated by EmmaBot]] subcategories with proper content
* namespace restructure (<code>Data:</code>, <code>Meta:</code>, <code>Export:</code>) per repository VISION.md
