<!-- History offloaded: due to miraheze stability concerns, the edit history of this page has been offloaded to the XML archive. See https://emmaleonhart.github.io/shintowiki-scripts/wikihistory.html?page=Enuma_no_Kuni_no_Miyatsuko for full history. Last refreshed: [[github:EmmaLeonhart/shintowiki-scripts/actions/runs/24796114356|commit triggered pipeline]] -->
{{日本の氏族
|家名 = Enuma no Kuni no Miyatsuko
|家紋 =
|家紋名称 =
|本姓 = Enuma-no-Omi, Enotakara-no-Omi
|氏祖 = {{ill|Wakugo-no-Sukune|ja|若子宿禰}}
|家祖 = {{ill|Shiwakatsu-no-Sukune|ja|志波勝足尼}} (4th-generation descendant of {{ill|Takenouchi-no-Sukune|ja|武内宿禰}})
|種別 = {{ill|Kōbetsu|ja|皇別}}
|出身地 =
|根拠地 = Enuma Province<br />(later part of {{ill|Enuma District|ja|江沼郡}} of {{ill|Kaga Province|ja|加賀国}})
|人物 =
|支流 =
}}

'''Enuma no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''enuma no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''enuma kokuzō'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled the ancient Japanese Enuma Province (later part of {{ill|Enuma District|ja|江沼郡}} of {{ill|Kaga Province|ja|加賀国}}, by way of {{ill|Echizen Province|ja|越前国}}).

== Overview ==
In the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'', it is written '''Enuma no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''; in the ''{{ill|Kojiki|ja|古事記}}'', '''Enotakara-no-Omi'''; and in the ''{{ill|Shinsen Shōjiroku|ja|新撰姓氏録}}'', '''Enuma-no-Omi'''<ref>[http://www.nihonjiten.com/data/263262.html Nihon Jiten "Enuma no Kuni no Miyatsuko"]</ref>.

{{ill|Motoori Norinaga|ja|本居宣長}} supported {{ill|Arakida Hisayoshi|ja|荒木田延佳}}'s view that "財" is a miswriting of "間," and interpreted the Enuma-no-Omi, who produced the Dairyō of {{ill|Enuma District|ja|江沼郡}}, and the Enotakara-no-Omi as kindred.

=== Ancestry ===
* The "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'' transmits that '''{{ill|Shiwakatsu-no-Sukune|ja|志波勝足尼}}''', 3rd-generation descendant of {{ill|Wakugo-no-Sukune|ja|若子宿禰}}, youngest son of '''{{ill|Takenouchi-no-Sukune|ja|武内宿禰}}''', was appointed kuni no miyatsuko by {{ill|Emperor Hanzei|ja|反正天皇}}.

=== Clan ===
In the ''{{ill|Kojiki|ja|古事記}}'' it is written as '''Enotakara-no-Omi''', and in the ''{{ill|Shinsen Shōjiroku|ja|新撰姓氏録}}'' as '''Enuma-no-Omi'''.

== History ==
{{ill|Wakugo-no-Sukune|ja|若子宿禰}} is considered kin to the {{ill|Imizu clan|ja|射水氏|lt=Imizu-no-Omi|lt_ja=射水臣}} and {{ill|Tonami clan|ja|利波氏|lt=Tonami-no-Omi|lt_ja=利波臣}}, and clans of Hokuriku—including the Enuma-no-Omi, the Yono-no-Omi (a clan of Yono-hyō, successor of Enuma Province), and the Enotakara-no-Omi—are all considered to be of the same lineage.

According to the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'', in {{ill|Emperor Kinmei|ja|欽明天皇}} 31 ([[570]]?), when envoys from {{ill|Goguryeo|ja|高句麗}} drifted ashore in the {{ill|Koshi|ja|越国|lt=Koshi|lt_ja=越}} region, {{ill|Michi clan|ja|道氏|lt=Michi-no-Kimi (name omitted)|lt_ja=道君（欠名）}}, who was "gunji" (originally kuni no miyatsuko, but rewritten), concealed the matter and did not report. In place of {{ill|Michi-no-Kimi|ja|道氏|lt=Michi-no-Kimi (name omitted)|lt_ja=道君（欠名）}}, {{ill|Enu-no-Mosuso|ja|江渟裙代}} reported it. When {{ill|Kashiwade-no-Katabuko|ja|膳傾子}} was dispatched to host the Goguryeo envoys, it was discovered that Michi-no-Kimi, pretending to be the Emperor, had received tribute, and investigations were conducted to have the tribute returned. From this record, there has been pointed out the possibility that Michi-no-Kimi is assigned to the northern Kaga chieftain who expanded his power in the latter 5th century, and the Enuma-no-Omi of the southern Kaga region resisted this, against the background of the Koshi situation. The Enuma-no-Omi retained power in {{ill|Enuma District|ja|江沼郡}} even after the {{ill|ritsuryō system|ja|律令制}}. Many Enuma-clan members were appointed as toneri of the {{ill|Shibi Chūdai|ja|紫微中台}}, which is surmised to be because the head {{ill|Fujiwara no Nakamaro|ja|藤原仲麻呂}} had ties to Echizen Province.

As shown by the entry "Enuma-no-Omi" in the ''{{ill|Shinsen Shōjiroku|ja|新撰姓氏録}}'', some clan members also migrated to the Kinai. {{ill|Enuma-no-Omi Koname|ja|江沼小並|lt=Enuma-no-Omi Koname|lt_ja=江沼臣小並}}, who was dismissed as Onmyō-no-suke in {{ill|Jōgan (Japan)|ja|貞観 (日本)|lt=Jōgan|lt_ja=貞観}} 9 ([[867]]) for being found guilty; {{ill|Enuma-no-Sukune Tomimoto|ja|江沼富基|lt=Enuma-no-Sukune Tomimoto|lt_ja=江沼宿禰富基}}, appointed Yamashiro-gon-daimoku in {{ill|Chōtoku|ja|長徳}} 2 ([[998]]); and {{ill|Enuma-no-Sukune Yasuuji|ja|江沼安氏|lt=Enuma-no-Sukune Yasuuji|lt_ja=江沼宿禰安氏}}, who concurrently held Geki-shisei and Tonomo-gon-no-shōsakan, are considered to be of this lineage<ref>[http://kojiki.kokugakuin.ac.jp/ujizoku/enotakaranoomi/ Kokugakuin University Clan Database "Enotakara-no-Omi"]</ref>.

== Tombs ==
The interred of the {{ill|Enuma Kofun Group|ja|江沼古墳群}} are considered to be the Enuma-no-Omi clan.

== Footnotes ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
{{Reflist}}

[[Category:加賀国]]
[[Category:石川県の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
[[Category:Pages without wikidata]]
{{wikidata link||ja|江沼国造}}