<!--interwikis from wikidata-->[[ja:甲斐国造]]
<!--interwikis from wikidata-->[[ja:甲斐国造]]
<!--interwikis from wikidata-->[[ja:甲斐国造]]
<!--interwikis from wikidata-->[[ja:甲斐国造]]


{{Infobox Japanese clan
| name = Kai Kuni no Miyatsuko (甲斐国造)
| crest = 
| crest_caption = 
| origin = {{ill|Kai clan|ja|甲斐氏|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Kai clan|1=Q11577901|comment=changed title based on wikidata|qid=Q11577901}}
| founder = {{ill|Shiomi no Sukune|ja|塩海宿禰|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Shiomi no Sukune|ja_comment=jawiki redirects to 塩海足尼}}
| type = {{ill|Shinbetsu|ja|神別|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Shinbetsu|qq=}} ({{ill|Amatsukami|ja|天津神|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/matsukami|ja_comment=jawiki redirects to 天津神・国津神|comment=confirming this goes to Amatsukami|1=Amatsukami|2=zh|3=天神 (日本神話)|4=fr|5=Amatsukami|6=mni|7=ꯑꯃꯠꯁꯨꯀꯃꯤ|comment=confirming this goes to Amatsukami|1=Amatsukami|2=zh|3=天神 (日本神話)|4=fr|5=Amatsukami|6=mni|7=ꯑꯃꯠꯁꯨꯀꯃꯤ}}) or {{ill|Kōbetsu|ja|皇別|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Kōbetsu|qq=}}
| homeland = {{ill|Yamato Province|en|Yamato Province|qid=Q907495|lt=Yamato Province|1=Yamato Province}}
| base = {{ill|Kai Province|en|Kai Province|qid=Q858076|lt=Kai Province|1=Kai Province}}
| notable_members = See [[#Notable Figures]]
| branches = {{ill|Mibu clan|ja|壬生氏|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Mibu clan|1=Mibushi|comment=changed title based on wikidata|qid=Q11429506}}, {{ill|Saigusa clan|ja|三枝氏|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Saigusa clan|1=Q24875188|comment=changed title based on wikidata|qid=Q24875188}} (samurai lineage)<ref>『三枝部氏初期綱要』</ref>, ({{ill|Hokuni no Miyatsuko|ja|穂国造|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Hokuni no Miyatsuko|1=Q11597049|comment=changed title based on wikidata|qid=Q11597049}}, {{ill|Hamanakakenushi|ja|浜名県主|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Hamanakakenushi|ja_comment=jawiki link invalid}})
}}

'''Kai Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (甲斐国造, also read as Kai Koku-zō) was the title of the ruler governing {{ill|Kai Province|en|Kai Province|qid=Q858076|lt=Kai Province|1=Kai Province}}.

__TOC__{{-}}

== Overview ==
=== Name ===
The title appears as '''Kai Kuni no Miyatsuko''' in the {{ill|Kojiki|en|Kojiki|qid=Q813031|lt=Kojiki|1=Kojiki}}, the {{ill|Kujiki|en|Kujiki|qid=Q2716751|lt=Sendai Kuji Hongi|1=Kujiki}} "Kuni no Miyatsuko Chronicles," and the {{ill|Shokeifu|ja|諸系譜|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Shokeifu|ja_comment=jawiki link invalid}}.<ref>[[:en:Makoto Suzuki|Makoto Suzuki]] "Eastern Kuni no Miyatsuko" in *Shokeifu*, Vol. 1.</ref><ref name="nakata">[[Nakata Norinobu]] "Kai Kuni no Miyatsuko" in *Shokeifu*, Vol. 7.</ref>

=== Ancestors ===
- According to the {{ill|Kojiki|en|Kojiki|qid=Q813031|lt=Kojiki|1=Kojiki}}, the lineage traces back to Emperor Kaika, who married Princess {{ill|Oketsuhime|ja|意祁都比売命|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Oketsuhime|1=Oketsu-hime no mikoto|comment=changed title based on wikidata|qid=Q97496338}} of the {{ill|Wani clan|ja|和邇氏|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Wani clan|ja_comment=jawiki redirects to 和珥氏|1=Wani clan|comment=changed title based on wikidata|qid=Q11417873}} lineage. Their son, {{ill|Hikoimasu no Ōkimi|lt=Hikoimasu no Ōkimi|lt=Hikozatsuo|ja|彦坐王|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Hikozatsuo|qq=}}, married Princess {{ill|Saho no Ōkurami to Me|ja|沙本之大闇見戸売|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Saho no Ōkurami to Me|1=Saho no Ōkuramito-me|comment=changed title based on wikidata|qid=Q13360104}}, giving birth to {{ill|Saho no Hikoo|ja|沙本毘子王|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Saho no Hikoo|ja_comment=jawiki link invalid}}, considered the ancestor of Kai Kuni no Miyatsuko and the {{ill|Kusakabe clan|ja|日下部氏|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Kusakabe clan|qq=}}.
- The {{ill|Kujiki|en|Kujiki|qid=Q2716751|lt=Sendai Kuji Hongi|1=Kujiki}} states that during Emperor Keikō’s reign, Shiomi no Sukune, a great-grandson of Saho no Hikoo, was appointed the first Kai Kuni no Miyatsuko.

=== Clan ===
The ruling clan, '''{{ill|Kai clan|ja|甲斐氏|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Kai clan|1=Q11577901|comment=changed title based on wikidata|qid=Q11577901}}''', bore the {{ill|Kabane|ja|姓|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Kabane|comment=enwiki is a redirect}} of {{ill|Kimi (kabane)|lt=Kimi (kabane)|lt=Kimi|ja|君|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Kimi|qq=}}. The claim of imperial descent has been a subject of scholarly debate (see [[#Analysis]]).

=== Analysis ===
==== Clan and Kabane ====
The establishment of the Kuni no Miyatsuko system coincided with the rise of the {{ill|Bemin|en|Bemin|qid=Q2892644|lt=Be system|1=Bemin}} during the late 5th to 6th centuries, enabling the {{ill|Yamato court|ja|大和王権|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Yamato court|ja_comment=|2=ja|3=ヤマト王権|1=Yamato Kingship|comment=changed title based on wikidata|qid=Q2658252}} to exert direct control over regional communities. 

Artifacts such as the ink-inscribed textiles from {{ill|Shōsōin|en|Shōsōin|qid=Q2379007|lt=Shōsōin|1=Shōsōin}} and ink-marked pottery unearthed in {{ill|Fuefuki|en|Fuefuki|qid=Q849434|lt=Fuefuki City|1=Fuefuki}} confirm the presence of the {{ill|Kusakabe clan|ja|日下部|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Kusakabe clan|qq=}} in Kai Province. Scholars like [[Akira Seki]] identify the Kusakabe as likely sharing the {{ill|Kabane|ja|姓|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Kabane|comment=enwiki is a redirect}} of {{ill|Ason|en|Ason|qid=Q4807592|lt=Ason|1=Ason}} or {{ill|Na|ja|直|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Na|1=Q11581705|comment=changed title based on wikidata|qid=Q11581705}}, which aligns with local governance roles.

==== Archaeological Links ====
The construction of {{ill|Kai Chōshizuka Kofun|en|Kai Chōshizuka Kofun|qid=Q11577925|lt=Kai Chōshizuka Kofun|1=Kai Chōshizuka Kofun}} in the 4th century indicates strong ties to the Yamato royal court. This connection is further substantiated by the discovery of {{ill|Sankakubuchi Shinjūkyō|ja|三角縁神獣鏡|1=Triangular-Rimmed Divine Beast Mirror|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Sankakubuchi Shinjūkyō|13=User:Immanuelle/Triangular-Rimmed Divine Beast Mirror|qq=}} in the area.

== Base of Power ==
Shiomi no Sukune and subsequent rulers were centered in the northern part of Kai Province, particularly in the area extending from present-day Fuefuki to eastern {{ill|Kōfu|en|Kōfu|qid=Q201932|lt=Kōfu|1=Kōfu}}.<ref name="houga2" />

=== Domain ===
The Kai Kuni no Miyatsuko likely governed the entirety of Kai Province, as no evidence suggests the presence of additional Kuni no Miyatsuko in the region.

== Clan Shrines ==
The clan's primary shrine was the {{ill|Sengen shrine|en|Sengen shrine|qid=Q3471785|lt=Asama Shrine (Fuefuki)|1=Sengen shrine}}, designated as the Ichinomiya of Kai Province.

=== Related Shrines ===
- {{ill|Tamamoro Shrine|ja|玉諸神社|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Tamamoro Shrine|qq=}}: Located in Kōfu, associated with the second ruler, Hayahiko no Sukune.
- {{ill|Miwa Shrine (Fuefuki City)|lt=Miwa Shrine (Fuefuki City)|lt=Miwa Shrine (Fuefuki)|ja|美和神社|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Miwa Shrine (Fuefuki)|qq=}}: Founded by Shiomi no Sukune under Emperor Keikō's orders.
- {{ill|Kanazakura Shrine|ja|金櫻神社|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Kanazakura Shrine|qq=}}: Associated with the worship of Yamato Takeru.

=== Burial Sites ===
- {{ill|Ōmaruyama Kofun|en|Ōmaruyama Kofun|qid=Q11431880|lt=Ōmaruyama Kofun|1=Ōmaruyama Kofun}}: Believed to be the burial site of Chitohiko no Mikoto.
- {{ill|Kai Chōshizuka Kofun|en|Kai Chōshizuka Kofun|qid=Q11577925|lt=Kai Chōshizuka Kofun|1=Kai Chōshizuka Kofun}}: Possibly the tomb of Shiomi no Sukune.

== Notable Figures ==
* '''{{ill|Shiomi no Sukune|ja|塩海足尼|1=Shiomi no Sukune|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/Shiomi no Sukune|13=User:Immanuelle/Shiomi no Sukune|qq=}}''': The first ruler, credited with founding several shrines and establishing Kai Province's governance.

== References ==
{{Reflist|refs=
<ref name="houga2">[[Hoga Toshio]]. "Genealogy and History of Kai Kuni no Miyatsuko," *Kojukyo no Fūken*, 2016.</ref>
}}


== See Also ==
* {{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧|12=simple|13=User:Immanuelle/List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja_comment=jawiki redirects to 国造}}

== Sources ==
* *Kokushi Daijiten* (吉川弘文館)
* Sakamoto Taro and Hirano Kunio, *Japanese Ancient Clan Dictionary* (吉川弘文館)
* *Nihonshi Kōjiten* (山川出版社)
* *Shintō Daijiten* (臨川書店)
* {{ill|Masayuki Suzuki|en|Masayuki Suzuki|qid=Q360719|lt=Masayuki Suzuki|1=Masayuki Suzuki}}, "Kai Kuni no Miyatsuko and Governance," *Journal of Japanese History*, 2011.
{{translated page|ja|甲斐国造|version=95211027|comment=Imported full ja history}}



[[ja:甲斐国造]]

<!-- Crest image --><!--Kai Kokuzo--><!--Kai Kokuzo--><!--Kai Kokuzo--><!--Kai Kokuzo--><!--Kai Kokuzo--><!--Kai Kokuzo--><!--Kai Kokuzo--><!--Kai Kokuzo--><!--Kai Kokuzo--><!--Kai Kokuzo--><!--Kai Kokuzo--><!--Kai Kokuzo-->
<!--jawiki derived wikidata interwikis-->
{{wikidata link|Q11577872}}
[[Category:Clans of Kai Province]]
[[Category:History of Yamanashi Prefecture]]
[[Category:japanese clans]]
[[Category:Kai Province]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[Category:Shinbetsu]]
[[Category:Wikidata no short description]]
[[Category:Page1]]


{{日本の氏族
|家名 = Kai no Kuni no Miyatsuko
|家紋 = <!-- 家紋の画像 -->
|家紋名称 =
|本姓 = {{ill|Kai clan|ja|甲斐氏}}
|家祖 = {{ill|Shiomi-no-Sukune|ja|塩海宿禰}}
|種別 = {{ill|Shinbetsu|ja|神別}} ({{ill|Tenjin|ja|天津神|lt=Tenjin|lt_ja=天神}}) or {{ill|Kōbetsu|ja|皇別}}
|出身地 = {{ill|Ōyamato Province|ja|大和国|lt=Ōyamato Province|lt_ja=大倭国}}
|根拠地 = {{ill|Kai Province|ja|甲斐国}}
|人物 = See [[#People|People]]
|支流 = {{ill|Mibu clan|ja|壬生氏}}, {{ill|Saegusa clan|ja|三枝氏}} ({{ill|bushi|ja|武家}})<ref>''Saegusa-be-shi Shoki Kōyō''</ref>, ({{ill|Ho no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|穂国造}}, {{ill|Hamana Agatanushi|ja|浜名県主}})
}}
'''Kai no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''kai no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''kai kokuzō'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled {{ill|Kai Province|ja|甲斐国}}.
__TOC__{{-}}

== Overview ==
=== Writing ===
In the ''{{ill|Kojiki|ja|古事記}}'', the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'', and the ''Shokeizu''<ref>{{ill|Suzuki Manen|ja|鈴木真年}}, "Tōgoku Shokokuzō," ''Shokeizu'' Vol. 1.</ref><ref name="nakata">{{ill|Nakata Kenshin|ja|中田憲信}}, "Kai no Kuni no Miyatsuko," ''Shokeizu'' Vol. 7.</ref>, it appears as '''Kai no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''.

=== Ancestry ===
* In the ''Kojiki'', '''{{ill|Hikoimasu-no-Ōkimi|ja|彦坐王|lt=Hikoimasu-no-Ōkimi|lt_ja=日子坐王}}''' — born when Waka-Yamato-Neko-Hiko-Obi-bimi-no-Mikoto ({{ill|Emperor Kaika|ja|開化天皇}}) took Okitsu-hime-no-Mikoto, younger sister of Hiko-Kunioketsu-no-Mikoto, ancestor of the {{ill|Wani clan|ja|和邇氏|lt=Wani-no-Omi|lt_ja=丸邇臣}}, as consort — then took Sa-ho-no-Ōkurami-to-me, daughter of Kasuga-no-Takekuni-Katsudome, as consort, and the child they produced was {{ill|Sahohiko|ja|狭穂彦王|lt=Sahobiko-no-Ōkimi|lt_ja=沙本毘子王}}. This Sahobiko-no-Ōkimi is made the ancestor of the Kai no Kuni no Miyatsuko and the {{ill|Kusakabe clan|ja|日下部氏|lt=Kusakabe-no-Muraji|lt_ja=日下部連}}.
* The "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'' records that during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Keikō|ja|景行天皇}}, '''{{ill|Shiomi-no-Sukune|ja|塩海宿禰|lt=Shiomi-no-Sukune|lt_ja=塩海足尼}}''', 4th-generation descendant, son of '''Omishitsuhiko-no-Kimi''', 3rd-generation descendant of Sahohiko-no-Ōkimi, was appointed Kai no Kuni no Miyatsuko.

=== Clan ===
'''{{ill|Kai clan|ja|甲斐氏}}''' (''kai-uji''; {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} of {{ill|Kimi (kabane)|ja|君 (カバネ)|lt=Kimi|lt_ja=君}}), with objections raised about its {{ill|Kōbetsu|ja|皇別}} origins ([[#Studies|see below]]).

=== Studies ===
==== Clan and Kabane of the Kuni no Miyatsuko ====
There is a theory that in the latter half of the {{ill|5th century|ja|5世紀}} to the {{ill|6th century|ja|6世紀}}, farmers and professional groups ruled by local chieftains were organized into units of "be," forming the {{ill|bemin system|ja|部民制}} in which the "be" held by local magnates were governed by central magnates and ''tomo-no-miyatsuko'' who provided tributes and corvée. The kuni no miyatsuko system, a hereditary position appointed by the {{ill|Yamato Kingship|ja|ヤマト王権}} over local magnates to govern provincial be, was also put in order.

In {{ill|Kai Province|ja|甲斐国}}, from the ink inscription on the ''chōyō'' white ashiginu gold-blue bag in the ''{{ill|Shōsōin|ja|正倉院宝物|lt=Shōsōin treasures|lt_ja=正倉院宝物}}'' and from {{ill|bokusho doki|ja|墨書土器|lt=ink-inscribed pottery|lt_ja=墨書土器}} unearthed from the Ōhara Ruins in Ichinomiya-chō, {{ill|Fuefuki, Yamanashi|ja|笛吹市|lt=Fuefuki City|lt_ja=笛吹市}}, it has been confirmed that the {{ill|Kusakabe|ja|日下部}}, a nashiro/koshiro-type be subordinate to the royal family, was established in {{ill|Yamanashi District|ja|山梨郡}}. The Kusakabe was widely distributed in the Tōkaidō and Tōsandō. Regarding their clan and kabane, {{ill|Seki Akira|ja|関晃}} considered them the same-ancestor Kusakabe as recorded in the ''Kojiki'', and estimated that their {{ill|kabane|ja|姓|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} was {{ill|Atai (kabane)|ja|直 (姓)|lt=Atai|lt_ja=直}}, common among local magnates and provincial kuni no miyatsuko, and shared with other be-managing clans in Kai Province, considering that they were in a same-clan relationship with the other be-managing clans. This is the commonly accepted position. On the other hand, {{ill|Suzuki Masanobu|ja|鈴木正信}} estimated "Kai-no-Atai" based on the Nijō-Ōji wooden tablet bearing "Sadaitoneri Kai □" and the fact that the clan names of other kuni no miyatsuko bear place names of the jurisdiction. However, neither position can be confirmed from extant historical sources.

==== Relationships with Other Regions ====
Archaeologically, the tumulus form of {{ill|Kai Chōshizuka Kofun|ja|甲斐銚子塚古墳}}, constructed in the 4th century, and the unearthing of {{ill|triangular-rimmed mirrors with deity and beast designs|ja|三角縁神獣鏡}} from the same kofun, show strong influence from the Kinai kingship.

== Base ==
The center, from Shiomi-no-Sukune onward, was consistently in the northern '''{{ill|Yamanashi District|ja|山梨郡}}'''. Based on archaeological sites and major shrines/rituals, it is thought to be the area from around the former Kasugai-chō of {{ill|Fuefuki, Yamanashi|ja|笛吹市|lt=Fuefuki City|lt_ja=笛吹市}} to the eastern part of {{ill|Kōfu|ja|甲府市|lt=Kōfu City|lt_ja=甲府市}}<ref name="houga2" />.

=== Territory ===
Since no other kuni no miyatsuko was established in {{ill|Kai Province|ja|甲斐国}}, it is thought that the entire Kai Province was ruled.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
'''{{ill|Asama Shrine (Fuefuki)|ja|浅間神社 (笛吹市)|lt=Asama Shrine|lt_ja=浅間神社}}''', the {{ill|ichi-no-miya|ja|一宮}} of {{ill|Kai Province|ja|甲斐国}}.

=== Related Shrines ===
*{{ill|Tamamoro Shrine|ja|玉諸神社}} (''tamamoro-jinja'')
*:A Shikinai rongi shrine enshrined in {{ill|Kōfu|ja|甲府市|lt=Kōfu City|lt_ja=甲府市}}, and the Third Shrine of Kai Province. Hayahiko-no-Sukune, the second kuni no miyatsuko, is said to have performed worship. The former enshrinement site was called Mimuroyama, and the priestly family called themselves Isobe-shi.
*{{ill|Miwa Shrine (Fuefuki)|ja|美和神社 (笛吹市)|lt=Miwa Shrine|lt_ja=美和神社}} (''miwa-jinja'')
*:A Shikinai rongi shrine enshrined in {{ill|Fuefuki, Yamanashi|ja|笛吹市|lt=Fuefuki City|lt_ja=笛吹市}}, and the Second Shrine of Kai Province. Origin is from Shiomi-no-Sukune, the kuni no miyatsuko, being enshrined as chief ritualist during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Keikō|ja|景行天皇|lt=Emperor Keikō|lt_ja=景行朝}}.
*{{ill|Kaina Shrine|ja|甲斐奈神社}} (''kaina-jinja'')
*:Three Shikinai rongi shrines exist. Doi-Moto-biko-no-Ōkimi, the kuni no miyatsuko's ancestor, is said to have started the worship.
*{{ill|Saku Shrine|ja|佐久神社}} (''saku-jinja'')
*:A Shikinai rongi shrine enshrined in Kōfu City. Said to have been founded after the kofun of Doi-Moto-biko-no-Ōkimi was re-interred from Ōmiyayama to Tenjinyama, and built at the original site.
*{{ill|Kanazakura Shrine|ja|金櫻神社}} (''kanazakura-jinja'')
*:A Shikinai rongi shrine enshrined in Kōfu City. Said to have been founded when, in the reign of Emperor Keikō, Shiomi-no-Sukune was ordered to construct the shrine buildings.
*{{ill|Kanazakura Shrine (Yamanashi)|ja|金櫻神社 (山梨市)|lt=Kanazakura Shrine|lt_ja=金櫻神社}} (''kanazakura-jinja'')
*:A Shikinai rongi shrine enshrined in {{ill|Yamanashi, Yamanashi|ja|山梨市|lt=Yamanashi City|lt_ja=山梨市}}. Said to have been founded when Shiomi-no-Sukune, of the Tanba clan in the capital, invited the Hashidate Myōjin from {{ill|Amanohashidate|ja|天橋立}} in his home country.

=== Tombs ===
*'''{{ill|Ōmaruyama Kofun|ja|大丸山古墳}}''' (''ōmaruyama-kofun'')
*:A {{ill|keyhole-shaped kofun|ja|前方後円墳}} in {{ill|Kōfu|ja|甲府市|lt=Kōfu City|lt_ja=甲府市}}, {{ill|Yamanashi Prefecture|ja|山梨県}}, possibly the tomb of Omishitsuhiko-no-Mikoto, the father of Shiomi-no-Sukune, from its mid-{{ill|4th century|ja|4世紀}} construction.
*'''{{ill|Kai Chōshizuka Kofun|ja|甲斐銚子塚古墳}}''' (''kai chōshizuka-kofun'')
*:A keyhole-shaped kofun in Kōfu City, Yamanashi Prefecture, possibly the tomb of Shiomi-no-Sukune, the first kuni no miyatsuko ancestor, from its late 4th century construction.
*'''{{ill|Tenjinyama Kofun (Kōfu)|ja|天神山古墳 (甲府市)|lt=Tenjinyama Kofun|lt_ja=天神山古墳}}''' (''tenjinyama-kofun'')
*:A keyhole-shaped kofun in Kōfu City, Yamanashi Prefecture, possibly the tomb of Hayahiko-no-Sukune, the second kuni no miyatsuko, from its 4th century construction.

== People ==
*'''{{ill|Shiomi-no-Sukune|ja|塩海足尼}}''' (''shiomi no sukune''; Shiomi-no-Sukune, Shiomi-no-Sukune)
*:First kuni no miyatsuko in the reign of {{ill|Emperor Keikō|ja|景行天皇|lt=Emperor Keikō|lt_ja=景行朝}}; involved in the founding of multiple shrines.

== Footnotes ==
{{Reflist|refs=
<ref name="houga2">Hōga Toshio, "[http://wwr2.ucom.ne.jp/hetoyc15/keihu/kaikokuso/kaikok1.htm The Genealogy and Clan of the Kai no Kuni no Miyatsuko]," ''Koju Kinobōma'', 2016.</ref>
}}

== See also ==
* {{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}

== References ==
* ''Kokushi Daijiten'' ({{ill|Yoshikawa Kōbunkan|ja|吉川弘文館}})
* {{ill|Sakamoto Tarō (historian)|ja|坂本太郎 (歴史学者)|lt=Sakamoto Tarō|lt_ja=坂本太郎}} and {{ill|Hirano Kunio|ja|平野邦雄}}, ''Nihon Kodai Shizoku Jinmei Jiten'' (Yoshikawa Kōbunkan)
* ''Nihon-shi Kōjiten'' ({{ill|Yamakawa Shuppansha|ja|山川出版社}})
* ''Shintō Daijiten'' ({{ill|Rinsen Shoten|ja|臨川書店}})
* {{ill|Suzuki Masanobu|ja|鈴木正信}}, "Reexamination of the 'Clan and Kabane' of the Kai no Kuni no Miyatsuko" (''Nihon-shi Kenkyū'' No. 584, 2011)
* Suzuki Masanobu, "A Study on the Genealogy of the Kai no Kuni no Miyatsuko" (''Hikone Ronsō'' No. 391, 2012)


{{DEFAULTSORT:かいのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:日本の歴史関連のスタブ項目]]
[[Category:甲斐国]]
[[Category:甲斐国の氏族]]
[[Category:山梨県の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:甲斐国造]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
[[Category:Page2]]
[[Category:Pages with duplicated content]]