{{Short description|Mountain in Takamatsu, Kagawa Prefecture, Japan}}
{{Use mdy dates|date=November 2025}}
{{Infobox mountain
| name        = Mount Goken
| other_name  = {{lang|ja|五剣山}} / ''Gokenzan''; also called {{lang|ja|八栗山}} ''Yakuriyama''
| photo       = 
| photo_caption = 
| elevation_m = 375
| prominence_m = 
| listing     = 
| location    = [[Takamatsu]], [[Kagawa Prefecture]], [[Japan]]
| range       = 
| coordinates = {{coord|34|21|40|N|134|08|29|E|display=inline,title}}
| map         = Japan Kagawa Prefecture#Japan
| map_caption = Location in Kagawa Prefecture
| label       = Mount Goken
| easiest_route = By [[Yakuri-ji|Yakuri]] cable car and footpath
}}

'''Mount Goken''' (Japanese: {{nihongo|五剣山|Gokenzan}}, lit. ''Five Swords Mountain''), also known locally as {{nihongo|八栗山|Yakuriyama}}, is a 375&nbsp;m mountain in [[Takamatsu]], [[Kagawa Prefecture]], Japan. It lies within [[Setonaikai National Park]] and is noted for five steep crags (traditionally counted as “five swords”) and for [[Yakuri-ji]], Temple 85 of the [[Shikoku Pilgrimage]], on its western slope.<ref name="ja">{{cite web |title=五剣山 (高松市の山) |url=https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E4%BA%94%E5%89%A3%E5%B1%B1_%28%E9%AB%98%E6%9D%BE%E5%B8%82%E3%81%AE%E5%B1%B1%29 |website=Japanese Wikipedia |language=ja |access-date=2025-11-10}}</ref><ref name="YakuriSite">{{cite web |title=第85番札所 五剣山観自在院 八栗寺 |url=https://yakuriji.jp/ |website=Yakuriji official site |language=ja |access-date=2025-11-10}}</ref><ref>{{cite web |title=Temple 85, Yakuriji｜What to See & Do |url=https://shikoku-tourism.com/en/see-and-do/10208 |website=Shikoku Tourism |language=en |access-date=2025-11-10}}</ref><ref>{{cite web |title=Setonaikai National Park |url=https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Setonaikai_National_Park |website=English Wikipedia |access-date=2025-11-10}}</ref>

== Overview ==
From the [[Sanuki Plain]] the mountain’s skyline is popularly compared to the profile of a reclining Buddha. Local tradition associated with [[Kūkai]] (Kōbō Daishi) holds that five swords descended from heaven during his ascetic training here, giving the mountain its name; another etymology derives from its five major pinnacles, counted from west to east as the First through Fifth “Sword.”<ref name="ja" />

The highest point (375&nbsp;m) is on the Fourth Sword. A 366&nbsp;m summit mark stands on the Second Sword, and a fourth-order triangulation point (366.09&nbsp;m) lies at the west end of the First Sword.<ref name="ja" /> Several small shrines are located on the ridgeline; an intermediate cave on the Fourth Sword has long served as a site for [[Shugendō]] practice.<ref name="ja" />

== Geology and hazards ==
Mount Goken’s pinnacles consist mainly of volcanic breccia of the Miocene Sanuki Group with weaker interbedded tuff layers. During the [[1707 Hōei earthquake]], part of the easternmost peak (the Fifth Sword) collapsed as large rockfalls, altering the mountain’s outline; strong horizontal accelerations (estimated ~300–500&nbsp;gal) have been inferred from historical sources and field evidence.<ref>{{cite web |title=History of Disasters – Mt. Goken (Mt. Yaguri) |url=https://www.kagawa-u.ac.jp/iecms_english/history_and_culture_of_kagawa/history_of_disasters.html |website=Kagawa University |language=en |access-date=2025-11-10}}</ref><ref>{{cite web |title=1707年宝永地震による讃岐五剣山の山体崩壊 |url=https://www.jsce.or.jp/library/eq10/proc/00035/58-03-0197.pdf |website=Japan Society of Civil Engineers |language=ja |access-date=2025-11-10}}</ref><ref>{{cite web |title=宝永4年の地震による五剣山の崩壊 |url=https://www.bousai.go.jp/kyoiku/kyokun/kyoukunnokeishou/rep/1707_houeijishin/pdf/08_chap04.pdf |website=Cabinet Office, Government of Japan (Disaster Management) |language=ja |date=2014 |access-date=2025-11-10}}</ref>

Granite known as '''Aji stone''' ({{lang|ja|庵治石}}), quarried at the foot of the mountain, is prized as a high-grade stone for monuments and architecture, including use at Japan’s National Diet Building.<ref name="ja" />

== Religion ==
[[Yakuri-ji]] (formally ''Gokenzan Kanjizai-in Yakuri-ji'') stands on the mountain’s western slope and serves as the 85th temple of the Shikoku Pilgrimage. Temple traditions relate that Kūkai practiced the [[Kokūzō gumonjihō]] here and named the mountain after burying five swords; the site later functioned as a prayer temple for the Takamatsu domain. The precincts include a cable-car upper station and viewpoints over the [[Seto Inland Sea]].<ref name="YakuriSite" /><ref>{{cite web |title=Gokenzan Kanjizaiin Yakuriji – Shikoku 88 Temple Pilgrimage |url=https://88shikokuhenro.jp/en/gokenzan-kanjizaiin-yakuriji/ |website=Shikoku 88 Temple Pilgrimage (official) |language=en |access-date=2025-11-10}}</ref>

== Access ==
* By road from [[Japan National Route 11|National Route 11]] to Kagawa Prefectural Route 145 (Yakuri Shindō), then approximately 3&nbsp;km to trailheads.<ref name="ja" />
* By the '''Yakuri Cable''' to Yakuri-Sanjo Station; about 5 minutes on foot to the temple precincts and mountain paths.<ref name="ja" /><ref>{{cite web |title=Yakuriji Temple Travel Guides |url=https://japantravel.navitime.com/en/area/jp/spot/02301-2800164/ |website=Japan Travel by NAVITIME |language=en |access-date=2025-11-10}}</ref>

== See also ==
* [[Yakuri-ji]]
* [[Setonaikai National Park]]
* [[Shikoku Pilgrimage]]

== References ==
{{reflist}}

== External links ==
* {{Official website|https://yakuriji.jp/}} {{lang|ja}}
* {{Commons category-inline|Gokenzan (Takamatsu City)}}

[[Category:Mountains of Kagawa Prefecture]]
[[Category:Setonaikai National Park]][[Category:Need translation]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
[[Category:Pages without wikidata]]