<!--interwikis from wikidata-->[[ceb:Otowa Yama (bukid sa Hapon, lat 34,98, long 135,85)]][[lld:Otowa Yama]]
<!--interwikis from wikidata-->[[ceb:Otowa Yama (bukid sa Hapon, lat 34,98, long 135,85)]][[lld:Otowa Yama]]
[[ja:音羽山 (滋賀県・京都府)]]
[[ja:音羽山 (滋賀県・京都府)]]<!--interwikis from wikidata-->
[[ceb:Otowa Yama (bukid sa Hapon, lat 34,98, long 135,85)]][[ja:音羽山 (滋賀県・京都府)]][[lld:Otowa Yama]]

'''Otowa Mountain''' is a mountain located on the border between Kyoto Prefecture and Shiga Prefecture. It is the highest peak in Yamashina Ward of Kyoto City, with an elevation of 593.2 meters. A triangulation point is located near the summit, with part of the summit area belonging to Kyoto Prefecture.
== Overview ==
Situated to the east of the Yamashina Basin and southwest of Lake Biwa, Otowa Mountain once formed part of the border between Yamashiro Province and Ōmi Province. The valley between it and Aisaka Mountain has long served as a key transportation route. Many classical poets—including {{ill|Kakinomoto no Hitomaro|en|Kakinomoto no Hitomaro|WD=Q380818|lt=Kakinomoto no Hitomaro|1=Kakinomoto no Hitomaro}} and {{ill|Ariwara no Narihira|en|Ariwara no Narihira|WD=Q451991|lt=Ariwara no Narihira|1=Ariwara no Narihira}}—have celebrated Otowa Mountain as a poetic motif.
== Transportation ==
A tunnel of the Tōkaidō Shinkansen (known as the Otowa Mountain Tunnel) passes directly beneath the summit, while the Keihan Keishin Line runs through the mountain valley between Otowa Mountain and Aisaka Mountain. Additionally, the Tōkai Nature Trail traverses the area, linking routes from the Ishiyama-dera side to the vicinity of Aisaka Mountain.
== References ==
{{Reflist}}
== See Also ==
* [[List of mountain names in Japan]]
* Biwa Lake Broadcasting – headquartered on the Shiga side.


<!-- no translated page template found in history -->
[[ja:音羽山 (滋賀県・京都府)]]

{{translated page|ja|音羽山 (滋賀県・京都府)|version=104187791|comment=Imported full ja history}}
{{wikidata link|Q11664332}}
[[Category:Geography of Otsu]]
[[Category:Geography of Yamashina-ku, Kyoto]]
[[Category:Mountain Gazetteers]]
[[Category:Mountains of Kyoto Prefecture]]
[[Category:Mountains of Shiga Prefecture]]
[[Category:Prefectural borders of Japan]]
[[Category:Wikidata has short description]]