<!--interwikis from wikidata-->[[commons:Category:Two-Wheeled Festival Floats]][[ja:二輪屋台]]
{{nihongo|'''Two-Wheeled Festival Floats'''|二輪屋台|Nirin-yatai}} refers to a type of festival float (yatai/dashi) used at festivals. They are found mainly in the eastern part of **Tōtōmi Province**, in what is now the **Enshū** region of **Shizuoka Prefecture**, across the area from the **Ōi River** to the **Tenryū River**—including **Iwata City**, **Fukuroi City**, **Shūchi District**, **Kakegawa City**, and others—covering central and eastern Enshū and parts of northern Enshū, especially along the **Tōkaidō**. This article deals with two-wheeled yatai of the Enshū region.

== Overview ==
In the Enshū region, two-wheeled yatai are generally called simply **“yatai”** (屋台/屋臺), without distinction from the four-wheeled yatai of the western Enshū area. In Yokosuka, Kakegawa City, however, they are called **“Neri”** (禰里).

Unlike ordinary four-wheeled yatai or dashi, a notable feature is that the float is rocked vigorously from side to side while being pulled.

== Classification of Enshū Yatai ==
Except for western Enshū, the Enshū region is nationally rare in that two-wheeled yatai are the mainstream type of festival float. Even within this limited area, many diverse styles can be seen, each emphasizing different techniques and aesthetics depending on the district.

== Single-pillar Mandō Type ==
Strictly speaking, this type is classified as a **dashi**. It is the prototype of the floats used in Edo’s Tenka Matsuri and similar floats can be seen in the mid-Edo–period illustrated scroll *Kanda Myōjin Sairei Emaki*. A single pillar called a **shingenbō** is erected on the hayashi platform, topped with a **mandō** (lantern tower), above which a dashi doll and a pine tree as a yorishiro are displayed (in some areas, only the pine tree). These are pulled in Asaba Town of Fukuroi City, Ōsuga Town and Daitō Town of Kakegawa City, Ogasa Town of Kikugawa City, parts of Hamaoka Town in Omaezaki City, and very limited areas of Makinohara City. They are commonly seen along or near the Enshū-nada coast. A famous example is that of the **Enshū Yokosuka Mikumano Shrine Grand Festival** (Yokosuka, Kakegawa City), which, as noted above, is called *Neri* rather than *yatai*.

== Goshoguruma Type ==
So called because it resembles a **goshoguruma** (imperial carriage). It is found throughout the central and eastern Enshū region from Kikugawa City to Iwata City. Like the single-pillar mandō type, a dashi doll is displayed on the roof (with some exceptions). Although many local variants exist, recent years have seen increasing standardization and blending of features due to resale, transfer, and new construction.

Representative types include:

=== - **Fukuroi Type** ===
  Developed from the Hisaka type, with four or six pillars. Railings may be decorated with gibōshi finials, distinguishing it from the Mori type (though not always). Decorative canopies (*mizuhiki-maku*) are also common. Found mainly around Fukuroi City. The oldest confirmed record of a Fukuroi yatai dates to Tenpō 13 of the Edo period, when Kawai Village (now Kawai-Nishi, Kawai-Naka, and Kawai-Higashi neighborhoods) purchased a “morning-glory yatai” from Yasaka-no-miya Village and remodeled it into a balustraded style. Among so-called balustraded goshoguruma types, it is considered quite old. In recent years, differences from the Mori type have become increasingly ambiguous, partly due to the decline in yatai carpenters.

=== - **Mori Type** ===
  Built with four pillars and, in principle, finished in lacquer. Decorative mizuhiki-maku are often not used. Young men ride on the front projecting balustrade to direct the float. Common in Mori Town, Shūchi District. Recently, distinctions from the Fukuroi type have become less clear.

=== - **Kakegawa Type** ===
  Generally lacks bracket complexes, *kamaboko* brackets, and *shirin* above the transom, and also lacks side screens. Built with six pillars; the front half of the sides has railings, while the rear half has fixed fittings (often lattice shōji). The front projecting balustrade is large, with children riding there to play the hayashi’s shime-daiko (older examples from before the Taishō period, like the Hisaka type below, may lack this feature). Common in central Kakegawa City and parts of Kikugawa City.

=== - **Hisaka Type** ===
  The second-oldest form after Yokosuka’s Neri, and highly influential in the origin and development of yatai throughout Enshū. It lacks the rooftop “hamadoko” veranda, as well as the front projecting balustrade and side screens. The balustrades are shōji-like and open outward, hence the colloquial name **“morning-glory yatai.”** Found mainly in the Hisaka and Yasaka districts of eastern Kakegawa City, and in small areas of Kikugawa City, Makinohara City, and Kanaya Town of Shimada City.

=== - **Nakaizumi Type** ===
  Lacks shōji and features hayashi performed at the projecting balustrade area like the Kakegawa type. Structurally close to the single-pillar mandō type. Seen at the Fuhachimangū Grand Festival in Nakaizumi, Iwata City, parts of Toyota Town in Iwata City, as well as limited areas of Haruno Town in Hamamatsu City, Kikugawa City, and former Toyooka Village in Iwata City.

=== - **Karahafu Type** ===
  Built with a **karahafu** (cusped gable) roof and does not display a dashi doll on top. Found in limited areas of Haruno Town in Hamamatsu City and Kikugawa City.

== Major Festivals Featuring Two-Wheeled Yatai ==
In the Enshū region, yatai festivals are held from April through November. Representative festivals featuring two-wheeled yatai include:

=== - **Enshū Yokosuka Mikumano Shrine Grand Festival** ===
  Mikumano Shrine, Yokosuka, Kakegawa City / First week of April  
  A representative festival of the single-pillar mandō type. Its festival music was designated the first Intangible Folk Cultural Property of Shizuoka Prefecture.

=== - **Iida Yamana Shrine Tennō Festival** ===
  Yamana Shrine, Iida, Mori Town, Shūchi District / Second or third week of July  
  The highlight is the yatai parading around the stage where bugaku dances are performed.

=== - **Kotonomama Hachimangū Grand Festival** ===
  Kotonomama Hachimangū, Hisaka and Yasaka districts, Kakegawa City / Second week of September  
  A classic example of the Hisaka type. The vigorous up-and-down rocking of the yatai is a major spectacle.

=== - **Nakaizumi Fuhachimangū Grand Festival** ===
  Nakaizumi Fuhachimangū, Nakaizumi, Iwata City / First week of October  
  A region where two-wheeled and four-wheeled yatai coexist.

=== - **Nakamura Yasaka Shrine Gion Festival** ===
  Nakamura Yasaka Shrine, Kakegawa City / First week of October  
  Single-pillar mandō type. The faithfully preserved rituals of Kyoto’s Gion Festival are designated as an Intangible Folk Cultural Property of Shizuoka Prefecture.

=== - **Fukuroi Festival** ===
  Jūnisho Shrine and others, along the former Tōkaidō in Fukuroi City / Second week of October  
  A harvest festival praying for health and prosperity, encompassing several shrine festivals and representing the largest event featuring Fukuroi-type yatai.

=== - **Shimozu Shrine Festival** ===
  Shimozu Shrine, Ikeshinden and Shimo-Asahina, Omaezaki City / Second week of October  
  A harvest festival featuring a distinctive single-pillar mandō type with unique floral decorations, known as the Ikeshinden type.

=== - **Kakegawa Festival** ===
  Ryūō Shrine and others, Kakegawa City (north of Kakegawa Station) / Weekend nearest October 10  
  Known not only for yatai but also for various performing arts and special entertainments held only at the triennial grand festival.

=== - **Mori Festival** ===
  Mishima Shrine and others, Mori, Mori Town, Shūchi District / First week of November  
  Famous for the **“Maiko-gaeshi”** ritual, in which children who performed sacred dances are returned home on yatai without touching the ground.

=== - **Shiomi-ji Yasaka Shrine Gion Festival** ===
  Shiomi-ji Yasaka Shrine, Shiomi-ji, Kikugawa City / Every three years in July  
  Features karahafu-type two-wheeled yatai ascending and descending the steps in front of the Shiomi-ji temple gate.

#

== Notes and References ==
<references/>

== Related Items ==
- **Dashi**
- **Oshagiri** – Two-wheeled yatai pulled at the Murakami Grand Festival and other events in Murakami City, Niigata Prefecture.

[[Category:Festivals in Shizuoka Prefecture]]  
{{wikidata link|Q11371811}}[[Category:Need translation]]
[[ja:二輪屋台]]