{{日本の氏族
|家名 = Ōku no Kuni no Miyatsuko
|家紋 =
|家紋名称 =
|本姓 = {{ill|Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai|ja|海部氏|lt=Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai|lt_ja=吉備海部直氏}}
|家祖 = {{ill|Sakinosukune-no-Mikoto|ja|佐紀足尼命}}
|種別 = {{ill|Shinbetsu|ja|神別}}
|出身地 =
|根拠地 = Ōku Province<br />(later {{ill|Oku District, Okayama|ja|邑久郡}} of {{ill|Bizen Province|ja|備前国}})
|人物 = See [[#People|People]]
|支流 =
}}
{{nihongo|'''Ōku no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''|大伯国造|''ōku no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''ōku kokuzō''}} was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled Ōku Province — bounded on the east by the border of {{ill|Harima Province|ja|播磨国}}, on the west by the {{ill|Yoshii River, Okayama|ja|吉井川|lt=Yoshii River|lt_ja=吉井川}} (at its peak, by the {{ill|Kojima Miyake|ja|児島屯倉}}), and on the north by the border of {{ill|Mimasaka Province|ja|美作国}}.<ref>''History of Ushimado-chō'' (Ushimado-chō, 2001).</ref><ref>{{Cite web|title=History of Oku-chō |url=https://www.city.setouchi.lg.jp/soshiki/7/3816.html |website=Setouchi City |access-date=2023-02-22 |language=ja}}</ref>

== Overview ==
=== Ancestry ===
* According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'', during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Ōjin|ja|応神天皇|lt=Emperor Ōjin|lt_ja=応神朝}}, '''{{ill|Sakinosukune-no-Mikoto|ja|佐紀足尼命}}''', a 7th-generation descendant of {{ill|Kamumusubi|ja|神魂命|lt=Kamimusubi-no-Mikoto|lt_ja=神魂命}}, was appointed kuni no miyatsuko.<ref name="名前なし-20230316115115">Nihon Jiten, "Ōku no Kuni no Miyatsuko (Kibi) [http://www.nihonjiten.com/data/263283.html]".</ref> At Misaki Shrine within {{ill|Kibitsu Shrine|ja|吉備津神社}}, '''Kushifuri''' — said to be the ancestor of the Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai — and his children '''Oki''' (female) and '''Mafuri''' (male) are enshrined.

=== Clan ===
{{ill|Kibi-no-Amabe|ja|海部|lt=Kibi-no-Amabe clan|lt_ja=吉備海部氏}} (''kibi no amabe-uji''; {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} of '''{{ill|Atai (kabane)|ja|直|lt=Atai|lt_ja=直}}'''). Among the Amabe-no-Atai who oversaw the Amabe ''be'', this was the clan based in Kibi Province (Bizen Province). In the ''{{ill|Kojiki|ja|古事記}}'', it appears as the clan of {{ill|Emperor Nintoku|ja|仁徳天皇}}'s consort Kuro-hime. A Bizen Provincial Government document dated the 21st day of the 4th month of {{ill|Chōwa|ja|長和}} 4 ({{ill|1015|ja|1015年}}) (in ''Heian Ibun'', Vol. 10) mentions an assistant magistrate (''shōryō'') of Oku District named Ama-no-Sukune Tomotada.<ref>Kokugakuin University Clan Database, "Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai [http://kojiki.kokugakuin.ac.jp/ujizoku/koshinotonaminoomi/]".</ref> Since the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'' records that {{ill|Ōku no Himemiko|ja|大伯皇女}}, daughter of {{ill|Emperor Tenmu|ja|天武天皇}}, was born at Ōku-no-umi in Kibi, the Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai — the kuni no miyatsuko family — is thought to have been her foster clan.<ref name="名前なし-20230316115115"/>

== People ==
* '''Kuro-hime''' (''kuro-hime'')
*: Because of her beauty she was taken into the service of {{ill|Emperor Nintoku|ja|仁徳天皇}}, but she returned home to Kibi out of fear of the jealousy of the Empress Consort, {{ill|Iwanohime|ja|磐之媛命}}.
* '''{{ill|Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai Akao|ja|吉備海部赤尾|lt=Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai Akao|lt_ja=吉備海部直赤尾}}''' (''kibi no amabe no atai akao'')
*: In {{ill|Emperor Yūryaku|ja|雄略天皇}} 7 ({{ill|463|ja|463年}}, possibly) he was ordered by Emperor Yūryaku to subjugate Silla, and to present and bring back from Baekje technicians more skilled than {{ill|Kanin Chiri|ja|歓因知利}}.
* '''{{ill|Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai Naniwa|ja|吉備海部難波|lt=Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai Naniwa|lt_ja=吉備海部直難波}}''' (''kibi no amabe no atai naniwa'')
*: In the 5th month of {{ill|Emperor Bidatsu|ja|敏達天皇}} 2 ({{ill|573|ja|573年}}) he was made escort for an emissary from {{ill|Goguryeo|ja|高句麗}}, but he abandoned the mission and made a false report, for which he was punished in the 7th month of the following year.<ref>''Nihon Shoki'', entries for Emperor Bidatsu Year 2, 5th month, 3rd day, and 7th month, 1st day; Year 3, 7th month, 20th day.</ref>
* '''{{ill|Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai Hashima|ja|吉備海部羽嶋|lt=Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai Hashima|lt_ja=吉備海部直羽嶋}}''' (''kibi no amabe no atai hashima'')
*: In Emperor Bidatsu 12 ({{ill|583|ja|583年}}) he was sent twice to Baekje to escort {{ill|Nichira|ja|日羅}} back.<ref>''Nihon Shoki'', entries for Emperor Bidatsu Year 12, 7th month, 1st day; 10th month; and year-summary entry.</ref>
== Descendants ==
* According to the ''{{ill|Ruijū Sandai Kyaku|ja|類聚三代格}}'', on the 24th day of the 6th month of {{ill|Tenpyō|ja|天平}} 3 ({{ill|731|ja|731年}}), the '''Amabe''' of Bizen Province attended upon {{ill|Emperor Shōmu|ja|聖武天皇}}.
* According to wooden tablets ({{ill|mokkan|ja|木簡}}) excavated from the Heijō Palace site, though the year is unknown, an individual named '''Amabe no Mi◻︎''' is recorded as the head of a household in Ishikami-gō, {{ill|Oku District, Okayama|ja|邑久郡}}, {{ill|Bizen Province|ja|備前国}}.
* According to a Bizen Provincial Government document of the 21st day of the 4th month of {{ill|Chōwa|ja|長和}} 4 ({{ill|1015|ja|1015年}}) (an annotation on the reverse of the Maeda family copy of ''Nenchū Gyōji Hishō''), the assistant magistrate (''shōryō'') Outer Senior Fifth Rank Upper Grade, '''Ama-no-Sukune Tomotada''', because of his "decrepit old age", requested that Acting Chief Magistrate (''dairyō'') Junior Eighth Rank Upper Grade, '''Ama-no-Sukune Tsunesada''', be installed as assistant magistrate.

== Tombs ==
The {{ill|Kuroshima Kofun|ja|黒島古墳}}, {{ill|Ushimado Tenjinyama Kofun|ja|牛窓天神山古墳}}, {{ill|Kahoyama Kofun|ja|鹿歩山古墳}}, and {{ill|Hakayama Kofun|ja|波歌山古墳}} in {{ill|Ushimado, Okayama|ja|牛窓町|lt=Ushimado-chō|lt_ja=牛窓町}} are considered the {{ill|kofun|ja|古墳}} of the Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai.<ref>{{Cite book|author={{ill|Katō Kenkichi|ja|加藤謙吉}}|date=2015|title=Nihon Kodai no Ōken to Chihō|series=|publisher={{ill|Daiwa Shobō|ja|大和書房}}}}</ref>

== Notes ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
{{Reflist}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:おおくのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:阿波国の氏族]]
[[Category:丹後国の氏族]]
[[Category:近畿地方の氏族]]
[[Category:古代日本の人物]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:大伯国造]]
[[Category:Need translation]]