{{日本の氏族
|家名=Ōmi no Kuni no Miyatsuko
<!-- |家紋= 家紋の画像 -->
|家紋名称=
|本姓=Ōmi-no-Omi
|家祖={{ill|Ame-Oshitarashi-Hiko-no-Mikoto|ja|天押帯日子命}}
|種別={{ill|Kōbetsu|ja|皇別}}
|出身地={{ill|Yamato Province|ja|大和国}}
|根拠地={{ill|Shiga District|ja|滋賀郡}}, {{ill|Ōmi Province|ja|近江国}}
|人物=
|支流=
}}
'''Ōmi no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''ōmi no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''ōmi kokuzō'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled [[#Base|Ōmi Province]].
__TOC__
{{clear}}

== Overview ==
=== Writing ===
In the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'', it appears as '''Ōmi no Kuni no Miyatsuko''', and also as '''Chikatsu-Ōmi no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''.

=== Ancestry ===
* According to the ''{{ill|Kojiki|ja|古事記}}'', the ancestor was '''{{ill|Ame-Tarashi-Hiko-Kuni-Oshi-Hito-no-Mikoto|ja|天足彦国押人命|lt=Ame-Oshitarashi-Hiko-no-Mikoto|lt_ja=天押帯日子命}}''', sharing ancestry with the {{ill|Wani clan|ja|和邇氏}}, {{ill|Kasuga clan|ja|春日氏}}, {{ill|Ono clan|ja|小野氏}}, {{ill|Nukata no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|額田国造}}, and {{ill|Musa no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|武社国造}}.
* In the same book's {{ill|Emperor Kōgen|ja|孝元天皇}} section, '''Ōmi-no-Omi''' is recorded as a descendant of {{ill|Hata-no-Yashiro-no-Sukune|ja|波多八代宿禰}}.
* According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'', during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Seimu|ja|成務天皇|lt=Emperor Seimu|lt_ja=成務朝}}, '''{{ill|Ōtamusaka-no-Ōkimi|ja|大多牟坂王|lt=Ōtamuya-Wake|lt_ja=大陀牟夜別}}''', 3rd-generation descendant of {{ill|Hikoimasu-no-Ōkimi|ja|彦坐王}}, was appointed Ōmi no Kuni no Miyatsuko.

=== Clan ===
'''{{ill|Ōmi clan|ja|淡海氏}}''' (''ōmi-uji''; {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} of {{ill|Omi|ja|臣}}), kin to the {{ill|Wani clan|ja|和珥氏}} and {{ill|Ono clan|ja|小野氏}}. However, {{ill|Ōmi no Mifune|ja|淡海三船}} and others are of a different lineage, being descendants of {{ill|Emperor Kōbun|ja|弘文天皇|lt=Prince Ōtomo|lt_ja=大友皇子}}.

In the "Kokuzō Hongi," it may seem as if it is the same kuni no miyatsuko as the {{ill|An no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|安国造}}, but the Ōmi no Kuni no Miyatsuko and An no Kuni no Miyatsuko are considered separate lineages<ref>{{ill|Ōta Akira|ja|太田亮}}, "Ōmi," ''Seishi Kakei Daijiten'' Vol. 1, Kokuminsha, 1944, pp. 169, 170.</ref><ref>{{ill|Hōga Toshio|ja|宝賀寿男}}, "6: The Positioning of the Chikatsu-Ōmi no Kuni no Miyatsuko and Related Clans," ''Kodai Shizoku no Kenkyū 1: Wani-shi — Flow of the Sea Deity Clan from Jiangnan China'', Aogaki Shuppan, 2012, pp. 109, 110.</ref>, and the entry in the "Kokuzō Hongi" is considered to have had the characters "Chika" and "An" dropped<ref>"[http://kojiki.kokugakuin.ac.jp/ujizoku/chikatsuouminoyasunoatai/ Chikatsu-Ōmi-no-An-no-Atai]," ''Kojiki-gaku Center'', {{ill|Kokugakuin University|ja|國學院大學}}.</ref>.

== Base ==
{{ill|Shiga District|ja|滋賀郡}} of {{ill|Ōmi Province|ja|近江国}}, corresponding to present-day {{ill|Ōtsu|ja|大津市|lt=Ōtsu City|lt_ja=大津市}} west of the {{ill|Seta River|ja|淀川|lt=Seta River|lt_ja=瀬田川}} and part of Takashima City. Later, it is said to have merged with the {{ill|An no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|安国造|lt=Chikatsu-Ōmi An no Kuni no Miyatsuko|lt_ja=淡海安国造}} on the eastern shore of {{ill|Lake Biwa|ja|琵琶湖}}, ruling all of Ōmi{{要出典|date=2022年3月}}{{なぜ|date=2022年3月}}.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
Unknown.

=== Related Shrines ===
*'''{{ill|Iwai Shrine|ja|石坐神社}}''' (''iwai-jinja'')
*:A {{ill|shrine|ja|神社}} enshrined in {{ill|Ōtsu|ja|大津市|lt=Ōtsu City|lt_ja=大津市}}, {{ill|Shiga Prefecture|ja|滋賀県}}. Since it enshrines {{ill|Toyotama-hiko-no-Kami|ja|ワタツミ|lt=sea deity Toyotama-hiko-no-Kami|lt_ja=海神豊玉比古神}} and others, it is thought to have been venerated by the Ōmi no Kuni no Miyatsuko clan<ref name="wani">Hōga Toshio, "6: The Positioning of the Chikatsu-Ōmi no Kuni no Miyatsuko and Related Clans," ''Kodai Shizoku no Kenkyū 1: Wani-shi — Flow of the Sea Deity Clan from Jiangnan China'', Aogaki Shuppan, 2012, pp. 112, 113.</ref>.

=== Tombs ===
*'''{{ill|Zeze Chausuyama Kofun|ja|膳所茶臼山古墳}}''' (''zeze chausuyama-kofun'')
*:A {{ill|keyhole-shaped kofun|ja|前方後円墳}} in Akibadai, {{ill|Ōtsu|ja|大津市|lt=Ōtsu City|lt_ja=大津市}}, {{ill|Shiga Prefecture|ja|滋賀県}}, constructed in the late {{ill|4th century|ja|4世紀}} to early {{ill|5th century|ja|5世紀}}, with a mound length of 122 meters. The Ōmi no Kuni no Miyatsuko is considered a possible occupant<ref name="wani"/>. About 200 meters south is the small Chausuyama Kofun, a {{ill|round kofun|ja|円墳}} considered to be an {{ill|auxiliary tomb|ja|陪塚}}.

== People ==

== Footnotes ==
{{Reflist}}

== See also ==
* {{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}

== References ==
* ''Kokushi Daijiten'' ({{ill|Yoshikawa Kōbunkan|ja|吉川弘文館}})
* {{ill|Sakamoto Tarō (historian)|ja|坂本太郎 (歴史学者)|lt=Sakamoto Tarō|lt_ja=坂本太郎}} and {{ill|Hirano Kunio|ja|平野邦雄}}, supervising eds., ''Nihon Kodai Shizoku Jinmei Jiten'' ({{ill|Yoshikawa Kōbunkan|ja|吉川弘文館}}, 2010)
* ''Nihon-shi Kōjiten'' ({{ill|Yamakawa Shuppansha|ja|山川出版社}})
* ''Shintō Daijiten'' ({{ill|Rinsen Shoten|ja|臨川書店}})

{{DEFAULTSORT:おうみのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:日本の歴史関連のスタブ項目]]
[[Category:近江国]]
[[Category:滋賀県の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:淡海国造]]
[[Category:Need translation]]