{{日本の氏族
|家名=Minosaki no Kuni no Miyatsuko
<!-- |家紋= family crest image -->
|家紋名称=
|本姓={{ill|Mino clan|ja|三野氏}} ({{ill|Atai (kabane)|ja|直 (姓)|lt=Atai|lt_ja=直}})
|家祖={{ill|Yatsuri-Iribiko-no-Ōkimi|ja|八瓜入日子王|lt=Yatsuri-no-Mikoto|lt_ja=八瓜命}}<br/>(son of {{ill|Hikoimasu-no-Miko|ja|彦坐王}})
|種別={{ill|Kōbetsu|ja|皇別}}
|出身地={{ill|Yamato Province|ja|大和国}}
|根拠地=Minosaki Province (later the central-western part of {{ill|Mino Province|ja|美濃国}})
|人物=See {{ill|#Clan|ja|#氏族|lt=#Clan|lt_ja=#氏族}}
|支流=Nagahatabe-no-Muraji
}}
{{nihongo|'''Minosaki no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''|三野前国造|''mino no saki no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''mino no saki no kokuzō'', ''mino no michinokuchi no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''mino no michinokuchi kokuzō''}} was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled {{ill|#Territory|ja|#支配領域|lt=Minosaki Province|lt_ja=三野前国}}. It is considered the same kuni no miyatsuko as the '''Mino no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' and the '''{{ill|Motosu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|本巣国造}}'''.<ref>"Ancient and Medieval, Chapter 1: The Kamo Area before the Taika Era, Section 3: Kuni no Miyatsuko and Agatanushi", in ''Minokamo City History: General History'', {{ill|Minokamo, Gifu|ja|美濃加茂市|lt=Minokamo City|lt_ja=美濃加茂市}}, 1980, p. 202.</ref><ref>"Chapter 6: Before the Taika Era, Section 2: Kuni no Miyatsuko and Agatanushi", in ''Kakamigahara City History: General History — Nature, Prehistory, Ancient, and Medieval'', Kakamigahara City Board of Education, 1986, pp. 181–184.</ref><ref name="kamo">{{ill|Hōga Toshio|ja|宝賀寿男}}, "Branching and Activities of the Minosaki no Kuni no Miyatsuko and Related Lines", in ''Kodai Shizoku no Kenkyū 18: The Kamo and Hattori Clans — Lineages Descended from Sukunabikona-no-Kami'', Aogaki Shuppan, 2021, pp. 81, 82.</ref>.

== Overview ==
=== Name ===
Recorded as '''Minosaki no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' in the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}''.

=== Ancestry ===
* The "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'' records that '''{{ill|Yatsuri-no-Mikoto|ja|八瓜命}}''', son of {{ill|Hikoimasu-no-Miko|ja|彦坐王}}, was appointed kuni no miyatsuko during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Kaika|ja|開化天皇|lt=Emperor Kaika|lt_ja=開化朝}}.
* In the ''{{ill|Kojiki|ja|古事記}}'' chapter on Emperor Kaika, {{ill|Kamu-Ōne-no-Miko|ja|神大根王}} (Yatsuri-Iribiko-no-Ōkimi) is recorded as the ancestor of the {{ill|Motosu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|本巣国造}} and Nagahatabe-no-Muraji; in the {{ill|Emperor Keikō|ja|景行天皇}} chapter, Ōne-no-Miko is recorded as the ancestor of the Mino no Kuni no Miyatsuko; and in the Keikō chapter of the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'', Kanpone is given as the Mino no Kuni no Miyatsuko — so the Minosaki, Motosu, and Mino no Kuni no Miyatsuko appear to have been the same kuni no miyatsuko.

=== Clan ===
The '''{{ill|Mino clan|ja|美濃氏}}''' (''mino-uji''; {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} of {{ill|Atai (kabane)|ja|直 (姓)|lt=Atai|lt_ja=直}}); also called '''Mino clan''' (三野氏) or '''Mino clan''' (御野氏). In the 6th month of {{ill|Jingo-keiun|ja|神護景雲}} 2 ({{ill|768|ja|768年}}), female officials including ''shōsō'' (chief palace cleaner), {{ill|Junior Fifth Rank|ja|従五位}} Upper Grade, Mino-no-Atai Tamamushi were appointed kuni no miyatsuko of their native provinces. Also, the "Mino Province, Kata District, Katakata-ri Household Register" shows a kuni no miyatsuko Ōba together with Mushina and Koma as mother and daughter; Koma appears in the 4th month of {{ill|Hōki|ja|宝亀}} 1 (770) as the Assistant Magistrate ({{ill|shōryō|ja|少領}}) of {{ill|Kata District|ja|方県郡}}, outer {{ill|Junior Sixth Rank|ja|従六位}} Lower Grade, kuni no miyatsuko Oma.

== Base ==
The kuni no miyatsuko's base was '''{{ill|Fuwa District|ja|不破郡}}''' of {{ill|Mino Province|ja|美濃国}}, present-day {{ill|Tarui, Gifu|ja|垂井町|lt=Tarui-chō|lt_ja=垂井町}} in {{ill|Gifu Prefecture|ja|岐阜県}}.

=== Territory ===
The kuni no miyatsuko's territory was the region then known as '''Minosaki Province''', corresponding to the later Fuwa District, {{ill|Yōrō District|ja|養老郡}}, and neighboring areas of Mino Province. To the north, {{ill|Ikeda District, Mino|ja|池田郡}} and {{ill|Ōno District, Mino|ja|大野郡 (美濃国)|lt=Ōno District|lt_ja=大野郡}} were the territory of the {{ill|Nukata no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|額田国造}}.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
'''{{ill|Nangū Taisha|ja|南宮大社}}''', the {{ill|ichinomiya|ja|一宮}} of {{ill|Mino Province|ja|美濃国}}, enshrining the kuni no miyatsuko's ancestral deity.

== Notes ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
{{Reflist}}

== References ==
{{No footnotes|section=1|date=11 September 2019}}
{{ページ番号|section=1|date=11 September 2019}}
* ''Kokushi Daijiten'' ({{ill|Yoshikawa Kōbunkan|ja|吉川弘文館}}).
* Sakamoto Tarō and Hirano Kunio, ''Nihon Kodai Ujizoku Jinmei Jiten'' ({{ill|Yoshikawa Kōbunkan|ja|吉川弘文館}}).
* ''Nihonshi Kōjiten'' ({{ill|Yamakawa Shuppansha|ja|山川出版社}}).
* ''Shintō Daijiten'' ({{ill|Rinsen Shoten|ja|臨川書店}}).

== See also ==
* {{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}

{{Japanese-history-stub}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:みののさきのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:美濃国]]
[[Category:岐阜県の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:三野前国造]]
