{{日本の氏族
|家名=Kamitsukenu no Kuni no Miyatsuko
<!-- |家紋= 家紋の画像 -->
|家紋名称=
|本姓={{ill|Kamitsukeno clan|ja|上毛野氏}}
|家祖={{ill|Toyoki-Iribiko-no-Mikoto|ja|豊木入日子命}}
|種別={{ill|Kōbetsu|ja|皇別}} (dissenting views exist)
|出身地={{ill|Yamato Province|ja|大和国}}
|根拠地={{ill|Kamitsukenu Province|ja|上毛野国}}
|人物=See [[#People|People]]
|支流={{ill|Shimotsukenu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|下毛野国造}}, {{ill|Ukita no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|浮田国造}}, {{ill|Noto no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|能等国造}}, {{ill|Harimakamo no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|針間鴨国造}}
}}
'''Kamitsukenu no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''kamitsukenu no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''kamitsukenu kokuzō'', ''kamitsukeno no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''kamitsukeno kokuzō'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled {{ill|Kamitsukenu Province|ja|上毛野国}}. Originally the Keno no Kuni no Miyatsuko, it split into the {{ill|Shimotsukenu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|下毛野国造}} during the reigns from {{ill|Emperor Nintoku|ja|仁徳天皇}} to {{ill|Emperor Kōtoku|ja|孝徳天皇}}.

== Overview ==
=== Name ===
In the ''{{ill|Kojiki|ja|古事記}}'' it is written '''Kamitsukenu-no-Kimi''', while the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'' and the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'' give '''Kamitsukenu no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''.

=== Ancestry ===
* The ''Kojiki'' names '''{{ill|Toyoki-Iribiko-no-Mikoto|ja|豊木入日子命}}''' as ancestor of the Kamitsukenu-no-Kimi and Shimotsukenu-no-Kimi.
* According to the ''Nihon Shoki'', Emperor Sujin's prince '''Toyoki-Irihiko-no-Mikoto''' was ordered to rule the eastern provinces and became the ancestor of the Kamitsukenu no Kuni no Miyatsuko, Shimotsukenu no Kuni no Miyatsuko, and others. His grandson '''{{ill|Hikosashima-no-Ōkimi|ja|彦狭嶋王}}''' was appointed governor of the fifteen provinces of the {{ill|Tōsandō|ja|東山道}} during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Keikō|ja|景行}}, and his son '''{{ill|Mimorowake-no-Ōkimi|ja|御諸別王}}''' continued to govern well.
* According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'', '''Hikosashima-no-Mikoto''', grandson of Emperor Sujin's prince '''Toyoki-Irihiko-no-Mikoto''', was the first to rule and pacify the twelve eastern provinces, and was enfeoffed as kuni no miyatsuko.

=== Clan ===
'''{{ill|Kamitsukeno clan|ja|上毛野氏}}''' (''kamitsukeno-uji''; {{ill|kabane|ja|姓}} of {{ill|Kimi (kabane)|ja|キミ (カバネ)|lt=Kimi|lt_ja=君}}). They were granted the {{ill|Ason|ja|朝臣}} kabane in {{ill|Emperor Tenmu|ja|天武天皇}} 13 ({{ill|684|ja|684年}}). Tasked with ruling the eastern provinces, they frequently fought the {{ill|Emishi|ja|蝦夷}}.

In {{ill|antiquity|ja|古代}}, along the {{ill|Kinu River|ja|鬼怒川|lt=Keno River|lt_ja=毛野川}} basin flowing into {{ill|Katori Sea|ja|香取海}}, a great clan dispatched from Yamato — descended from {{ill|Emperor Sujin|ja|崇神天皇}}'s prince {{ill|Toyoki-Irihiko|ja|豊城入彦|lt=Toyoki-Irihiko-no-Mikoto|lt_ja=豊城入彦命}} and worshiping {{ill|Ōkuninushi|ja|大国主神|lt=Izumo deity|lt_ja=出雲神}} — formed {{ill|Keno Province|ja|毛野国}} (''keno'' no kuni), which was later divided into Kamitsukenu Province and {{ill|Shimotsukenu Province|ja|下毛野国造|lt=Shimotsukenu Province|lt_ja=下毛野国}} ({{ill|Shimotsuke Province|ja|下野国}}). From ancient times Kamitsukenu Province lay along the old {{ill|Tone River|ja|利根川}} basin flowing into {{ill|Tokyo Bay|ja|東京湾|lt=Edo Bay|lt_ja=江戸湾}}, but through the {{ill|Tone River eastward redirection project|ja|利根川東遷事業}} it was merged with the Keno River and became the Tone River basin region flowing into the great sea, the {{ill|Pacific Ocean|ja|太平洋}}; its territory corresponds roughly to present-day {{ill|Gunma Prefecture|ja|群馬県}}.

== Base ==
The kuni no miyatsuko's base appears to have been around {{ill|Yamada District, Gunma|ja|山田郡 (群馬県)|lt=Yamada District|lt_ja=山田郡}} and {{ill|Nitta District|ja|新田郡}}. Many large kofun were built in these two districts, and these are thought to be the burial places of the kuni no miyatsuko.

=== Territory ===
The territory of the kuni no miyatsuko was the region then called '''Kamitsukenu Province''', corresponding to the later {{ill|Kōzuke Province|ja|上野国}} of the {{ill|ritsuryō state|ja|律令国家}} — present-day {{ill|Gunma Prefecture|ja|群馬県}}.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
The kuni no miyatsuko's worship shrine may have been '''{{ill|Akagi Shrine|ja|赤城神社}}''', the second shrine of Kōzuke Province, enshrined in {{ill|Maebashi, Gunma|ja|前橋市|lt=Maebashi City|lt_ja=前橋市}} in {{ill|Gunma Prefecture|ja|群馬県}}. Its enshrined deities are the ancestors of the kuni no miyatsuko, {{ill|Ōnamuchi-no-Mikoto|ja|大己貴命}} and {{ill|Toyoki-Irihiko-no-Mikoto|ja|豊城入彦命}}.

=== Tombs ===
*{{ill|Fujimoto-Kannonyama Kofun|ja|藤本観音山古墳}}
*: A 117-m-long {{ill|keyhole-shaped kofun (rectangle)|ja|前方後方墳|lt=zenpōkōhōfun|lt_ja=前方後方墳}} in {{ill|Ashikaga, Tochigi|ja|足利市|lt=Ashikaga City|lt_ja=足利市}} in {{ill|Tochigi Prefecture|ja|栃木県}}, built in the mid-{{ill|4th century|ja|4世紀}}. The buried person may be {{ill|Mimorowake-no-Ōkimi|ja|御諸別王}}.<ref>{{ill|Hōga Toshio|ja|宝賀寿男}}, "Chapter 6: The Buried of the Great Kofun of the Provinces", in ''Kyodai Kofun to Kodai Ōtōfu'', Aogaki Shuppan, 2005.</ref>
*{{ill|Asako-zuka Kofun|ja|朝子塚古墳}}
*: A 123-m-long {{ill|keyhole-shaped kofun|ja|前方後円墳}} in {{ill|Ōta, Gunma|ja|太田市|lt=Ōta City|lt_ja=太田市}} in Gunma Prefecture, built from the end of the 4th century to the beginning of the {{ill|5th century|ja|5世紀}}. The buried person may be the wife of Mimorowake-no-Ōkimi.
*{{ill|Bessho-Chausuyama Kofun|ja|別所茶臼山古墳}}
*: A 164-m-long keyhole-shaped kofun in Ōta City, Gunma Prefecture, built from the end of the 4th century to the beginning of the 5th century. The buried person may be {{ill|Aratawake|ja|荒田別}}.
*{{ill|Ōta-Tenjinyama Kofun|ja|太田天神山古墳}}
*: A 210-m-long keyhole-shaped kofun in Ōta City, Gunma Prefecture, built from the first half to the middle of the 5th century. The buried person may be {{ill|Takahase|ja|竹葉瀬}}.

== People ==
*'''{{ill|Mimorowake-no-Ōkimi|ja|御諸別王}}''' (''mimorowake-no-miko'')
*: An official of the {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代}}. He went to Keno during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Keikō|ja|景行天皇}}.
*'''{{ill|Ō-Aratawake-no-Mikoto|ja|荒田別|lt=Ō-Aratawake-no-Mikoto|lt_ja=大荒田別命}}''' (''ōaratawake-no-mikoto'')
*: A warrior of the Kofun period. Active during the regency of {{ill|Empress Jingū|ja|神功皇后}}.
*'''{{ill|Takahase|ja|竹葉瀬}}''' (''takahase'')
*: A warrior of the Kofun period. An envoy to Silla during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Nintoku|ja|仁徳天皇}}. He is said to have found a white deer and presented it to the emperor.
*'''{{ill|Kamitsukeno-no-Taji|ja|上毛野田道}}''' (''kamitsukeno-no-taji'')
*: A warrior of the Kofun period. A general during the reign of Emperor Nintoku. He attacked Silla but is said to have been defeated and killed by the Emishi. The younger brother of Takahase and ancestor of the {{ill|Shimotsukenu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|下毛野国造}}.
*'''{{ill|Kamitsukeno-no-Oguma|ja|上毛野小熊}}''' (''kamitsukeno-no-oguma'')
*: A warrior of the Kofun period. Kuni no miyatsuko during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Ankan|ja|安閑天皇}}. He is said to have held sway over the Kantō region and intervened in an internal conflict of the {{ill|Musashi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|武蔵国造}} family.

== Descendants ==
*{{ill|Kamitsukeno-no-Katana|ja|上毛野形名}}
*: A warrior of the {{ill|Asuka period|ja|飛鳥時代}}. A general during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Jomei|ja|舒明天皇}}. Though once defeated by the Emishi, he is said to have turned the tide through his wife's quick thinking.
*{{ill|Kamitsukeno-no-Wakugo|ja|上毛野稚子}}
*: A warrior of the Asuka period. A general during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Tenji|ja|天智天皇}}. Along with {{ill|Abe no Hirafu|ja|阿倍比羅夫}} and others, he took a Silla fortress.
*{{ill|Kamitsukeno-no-Michi|ja|上毛野三千}}
*: An official of the Asuka period. A scholar during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Tenmu|ja|天武天皇}}. He participated in the compilation of historical works with {{ill|Prince Kawashima|ja|川島皇子|lt=Prince Kawashima|lt_ja=川嶋皇子}} and others.
*{{ill|Kamitsukeno-no-Hideto|ja|上毛野穎人}}
*: An official of the {{ill|Heian period|ja|平安時代}}. Envoy-recorder to Tang. Tōgū-gakushi. During the {{ill|Kusuko Incident|ja|薬子の変}} he secretly informed on the retired emperor's side.
*{{ill|Kamitsukeno-no-Shigeko|ja|上毛野滋子}}
*: A court lady of the Heian period. Naishi-no-suke. Junior Third Rank. A member of the household of {{ill|Fujiwara no Yoshifusa|ja|藤原良房}}.
*{{ill|Kamitsukeno-no-Nagayo|ja|上毛野永世}}
*: An official of the Heian period. Owari-no-suke. Junior Fourth Rank Lower. Participated in the compilation of the {{ill|Jōgan Kyaku|ja|貞観格}}.

== Genealogy ==

== Footnotes ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
{{Reflist}}

== See also ==
*{{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}

== References ==
*''Kokushi Daijiten'' (Yoshikawa Kōbunkan)
*Sakamoto Tarō, Hirano Kunio, ''Nihon Kodai Shizoku Jinmei Jiten'' (Yoshikawa Kōbunkan)
*''Nihon-shi Kō-jiten'' (Yamakawa Shuppansha)
*''Shintō Daijiten'' (Rinsen Shoten)

[[Category:日本の歴史関連のスタブ項目|かみつけぬのくにのみやつこ]]
[[Category:上野国|かみつけぬのくにのみやつこ]]
[[Category:群馬県の歴史|かみつけぬのくにのみやつこ]]
[[Category:上毛野氏|*かみつけの]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:上毛野国造]]
