{{日本の氏族
|家名 = Kamitsumichi no Kuni no Miyatsuko
|家紋 =
|家紋名称 =
|本姓 = {{ill|Kamitsumichi clan|ja|上道氏|lt=Kamitsumichi-no-Omi|lt_ja=上道臣}}, later Kamitsumichi-no-Ason
|家祖 = {{ill|Tasa-no-Omi|ja|多佐臣}} ({{ill|Kibi-no-Kamitsumichi Tasa|ja|吉備上道田狭}}?)
|種別 = {{ill|Kōbetsu|ja|皇別}}
|出身地 =
|根拠地 = Kamitsumichi District of Kibi<br />(later {{ill|Jōtō District|ja|上道郡}} of {{ill|Bizen Province|ja|備前国}})
|人物 = See [[#People|People]]
|支流 = Kaya-no-Omi ({{ill|Kaya no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|加夜国造}})
}}
'''Kamitsumichi no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''kamitsumichi no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''kamitsumichi kokuzō'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled the Kamitsumichi District of Kibi (later {{ill|Jōtō District|ja|上道郡}} of {{ill|Bizen Province|ja|備前国}}).

== Overview ==
The {{ill|Kamitsumichi-no-Omi|ja|上道氏|lt=Kamitsumichi-no-Omi|lt_ja=上道臣}} controlled iron, salt, and maritime transport on the Seto Inland Sea; by forming marriage alliances with the {{ill|great king|ja|大王}} and deeply participating in military actions at home and abroad, they took part in the central royal power. Volume 10 of the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'' records the name Ehime, younger sister of {{ill|Mitomowake-no-Mikoto|ja|御友別命}}, as a consort of {{ill|Emperor Ōjin|ja|応神天皇}}.<ref>''Nihon Shoki'', entry for Emperor Ōjin Year 22, 3rd month, 14th day.</ref>

Huge {{ill|kofun|ja|古墳}} such as the {{ill|Urama-Chausuyama Kofun|ja|浦間茶臼山古墳}} (Urama, Higashi Ward, {{ill|Okayama|ja|岡山市|lt=Okayama City|lt_ja=岡山市}}) are manifestations of the Kamitsumichi no Kuni no Miyatsuko's power.

=== Ancestry ===
* According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'', during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Ōjin|ja|応神天皇|lt=Emperor Ōjin|lt_ja=応神朝}}, '''{{ill|Tasa-no-Omi|ja|多佐臣}}''', son of {{ill|Nakatsuhiko-no-Mikoto|ja|中彦命}} who had originally been lord of Kamitsumichi District, was appointed kuni no miyatsuko. According to the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'', {{ill|Nakatsuhiko-no-Mikoto|ja|仲彦命}}, son of {{ill|Mitomowake-no-Mikoto|ja|御友別命}} — son of {{ill|Kibi-Takehiko-no-Mikoto|ja|吉備武彦命}} and descendant of {{ill|Kibitsuhiko-no-Mikoto|ja|吉備津彦命}} — was given Kamitsumichi Province as his portion and became ancestor of the {{ill|Kamitsumichi-no-Omi|ja|上道氏|lt=Kamitsumichi-no-Omi|lt_ja=上道臣}} and {{ill|Kaya-no-Omi|ja|加夜国造|lt=Kaya-no-Omi|lt_ja=香屋臣}}.<ref>[http://www.nihonjiten.com/data/263281.html Nihon Jiten: "Kamitsumichi no Kuni no Miyatsuko (Kibi)"]</ref>

=== Clan ===
{{ill|Kamitsumichi clan|ja|上道氏}} (''kamitsumichi-uji''; {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} of '''{{ill|Omi|ja|臣}}''', later {{ill|Ason|ja|朝臣}}).

== History ==
The first historical figure specifically identified as Kamitsumichi no Kuni no Miyatsuko (of the Kamitsumichi clan) is '''{{ill|Kibi-no-Kamitsumichi Tasa|ja|吉備上道田狭}}'''. According to the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'', in {{ill|Emperor Yūryaku|ja|雄略天皇}} 7 ({{ill|463|ja|463年}}), Tasa boasted to his friends of the beauty of his wife {{ill|Wakahime|ja|吉備稚媛|lt=Wakahime|lt_ja=稚媛}} (daughter of the Kibi-Kamitsumichi-no-Omi and Kibi-Kuboya-no-Omi, or daughter of {{ill|Tamada-no-Sukune|ja|玉田宿禰}}, son of {{ill|Katsuragi no Sotsuhiko|ja|葛城襲津彦}} — in which case she was called Kehime, not Wakahime). Hearing this, {{ill|Emperor Yūryaku|ja|雄略天皇}} desired to take Wakahime as consort, appointed Tasa governor (dispatched official) of {{ill|Mimana|ja|任那}}, and while he was away brought Wakahime into the rear palace. Because of this, Tasa joined with {{ill|Silla|ja|新羅}} from Mimana ({{ill|Gaya|ja|伽耶}}); his son '''{{ill|Kibi-no-Kamitsumichi Otokimi|ja|吉備上道弟君}}''' was ordered to punish him but would not obey, and conversely conspired with Tasa, for which Otokimi was killed by his wife Kusuhime.<ref>''Nihon Shoki'', entry for Emperor Yūryaku Year 7, year-summary.</ref> Afterwards Tasa's whereabouts are unknown.

The next Kamitsumichi no Kuni no Miyatsuko figure to appear is '''{{ill|Kibi-no-Kamitsumichi Ekimi|ja|吉備上道兄君}}'''. Ekimi was Tasa's son and Otokimi's elder brother. In the 8th month of {{ill|Emperor Yūryaku|ja|雄略天皇}} 23 ({{ill|479|ja|479年}}), when the emperor passed away, Ekimi together with Wakahime and others raised a rebellion, supporting Wakahime's son {{ill|Prince Hoshikawa|ja|星川稚宮皇子}}, but failed. At that time a "Kibi-Kamitsumichi-no-Omi" led a naval force of 40 ships to come to their aid — this may have been Tasa.<ref>''Nihon Shoki'', preface to the reign of {{ill|Emperor Seinei|ja|清寧天皇}}.</ref>

The next Kamitsumichi no Kuni no Miyatsuko figure to appear is '''Kibi-Otokimi-no-Omi'''. Although his name is Otokimi, he is a different person from Tasa's son. There is also a theory that he is a descendant of Tasa, who had joined with Silla.<ref>{{Cite journal|和書 |author=Kawachi Haruto |year=2017 |title=Political Mobility and Human Flow in Ancient East Asia |url=https://doi.org/10.34360/00008258 |journal=Senshū University Research Center for Social Capital Development, Ancient East Eurasia Research Center Annual |publisher=Senshū University Research Center for Social Capital Development |volume=3 |pages=103-121 |doi=10.34360/00008258 |naid=120006785668 |ref=harv}}</ref> According to the ''Nihon Shoki'', in {{ill|Emperor Kinmei|ja|欽明天皇}} 5 ({{ill|544|ja|544年}}), Otokimi, an official of the {{ill|Mimana Nihon-fu|ja|任那日本府}}, had joined with {{ill|Silla|ja|新羅}}.<ref>''Nihon Shoki'', entry for Emperor Kinmei Year 5, 3rd month.</ref> Also, in the 4th month of Emperor Kinmei 2, a Kibi-no-Omi of the Mimana Nihon-fu is said to have gone to Baekje; this is thought to be Otokimi. Even before the time of {{ill|Emperor Keitai|ja|継体天皇|lt=Keitai era|lt_ja=継体期}}, when the ''{{ill|Baekje Bon'gi|ja|百済三書|lt=Baekje Bon'gi|lt_ja=百済本記}}'' records the Nihon-fu, Kibi-no-Omi and others resided in the Gaya states as {{ill|Wa-lineage Gaya people|ja|伽耶|lt=Wa-lineage Gaya people|lt_ja=倭系加耶人}}; if one takes seriously the tradition of the Kibi clan's rebellion in the Yūryaku era, it is conceivable that a Kibi-no-Omi lineage — unlike the pro-Baekje, anti-Silla diplomatic stance of the Yamato court — resided in Gaya as stated in "I will hold Mimana and also not go through to Japan." Although they were originally Wa-no-Omi (in the ''Baekje Bon'gi'' the phrase "the Wa-no-Omi in Anra" emphasizes that they were Wa-no-Omi because they were descendants of former Wa-no-Omi, expecting a subordinate relationship to the Yamato court, but does not necessarily accurately indicate their position at that time), the Kibi-no-Omi can be positioned as a presence relatively independent of the Yamato court, acting as a voice for the diplomatic stance of maintaining the independence of the Gaya states.<ref>{{Cite journal|和書|author={{ill|Nitō Atsushi|ja|仁藤敦史}} |date=2019-09 |url=https://rekihaku.repo.nii.ac.jp/records/2481 |title=Personal Intercourse and Diplomacy between Wa and Baekje: Wa People's Immigration and Wa-Lineage Baekje Officials (Part 1: General Remarks) |journal=Bulletin of the National Museum of Japanese History |ISSN=0286-7400 |publisher={{ill|National Museum of Japanese History|ja|国立歴史民俗博物館}} |volume=217 |pages=29-45 |CRID=1050569070642607232}}</ref>

== Descendants ==
*'''{{ill|Kamitsumichi-no-Hidatsu|ja|上道斐太都}}'''
*: A person of the {{ill|Nara period|ja|奈良時代}}. In {{ill|Tenpyō Hōji|ja|天平宝字}} 1 ({{ill|757|ja|757年}}), while serving as {{ill|Chūe-fu|ja|中衛府|lt=Chūe-no-toneri|lt_ja=中衛舎人}}, he was promoted from {{ill|Junior Eighth Rank|ja|従八位|lt=Junior Eighth Rank Upper|lt_ja=従八位上}} to {{ill|Junior Fourth Rank|ja|従四位|lt=Junior Fourth Rank Lower|lt_ja=従四位下}} and Chūe-Shōshō for his meritorious service in the {{ill|Tachibana no Naramaro Rebellion|ja|橘奈良麻呂の乱}}, and was bestowed the {{ill|Ason|ja|朝臣}} kabane in place of his previous {{ill|Omi|ja|臣}} kabane. At the end of the same year he was further granted 20 chō of {{ill|kōden|ja|功田}}.<ref>''Shoku Nihongi'', entry for the 2nd day.</ref><ref>''Shoku Nihongi'', entry for Tenpyō Hōji 1, 12th month, 9th day.</ref> Later he was appointed {{ill|Bizen Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造|lt=Bizen Kuni no Miyatsuko|lt_ja=備前国造}}.<ref>''Shoku Nihongi'', entry for Jingo-Keiun 1, 9th month, 23rd day.</ref>

*In a document dated {{ill|Tenpyō|ja|天平}} 10 ({{ill|739|ja|739年}}) in the "{{ill|Shōsōin documents|ja|正倉院文書}}", the name '''Kamitsumichi-no-Omi Chiyo''', Buryō-shi of Senior Sixth Rank Lower, appears.
*In a document dated Tenpyō 10 ({{ill|739|ja|739年}}) in the "Shōsōin documents", the name '''Kamitsumichi-no-Omi Omoho''' appears as the head of a household in Toba-ri, {{ill|Nadegawa District|ja|撫川郡}}, {{ill|Bitchū Province|ja|備中国}}.
*In a document dated the 11th day of the 8th month of {{ill|Kōnin|ja|弘仁}} 8 ({{ill|819|ja|819年}}) in the "{{ill|Ninnaji documents|ja|仁和寺文書}}", the name '''Kamitsumichi-no-Omi (name lost)''' of Senior Initial Rank Lower appears as the previous year's {{ill|Chōshūshi|ja|朝集使}}.
*The ''{{ill|Gaiki Bunin|ja|外記補任}}'' records that Gon-no-Shō-Geki '''Kamitsumichi-no-Ason Tameyō''' died on the 1st day of the 5th month of {{ill|Shōryaku|ja|正暦}} 2 ({{ill|991|ja|991年}}), and that Shō-Hanji '''Kamitsumichi-no-Ason Tameie''' was appointed Gon-no-Shō-Geki.

== Tomb ==
The {{ill|Urama-Chausuyama Kofun|ja|浦間茶臼山古墳}} in {{ill|Okayama|ja|岡山市|lt=Okayama City|lt_ja=岡山市}} is thought, from its scale, to be that of the Kamitsumichi no Kuni no Miyatsuko. Also, the {{ill|Ryōgūzan Kofun|ja|両宮山古墳}} in {{ill|Akaiwa, Okayama|ja|赤磐市|lt=Akaiwa City|lt_ja=赤磐市}} is said by tradition to be Tasa's tomb. From its name it is also said to have buried both Tasa and Otokimi.

== Footnotes ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
{{Reflist}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:かみつみち}}
[[Category:備前国]]
[[Category:岡山市の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:上道国造]]
