'''Shimotsukenu no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''shimomitsukenu no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''shimotsukenu kokuzō'', ''shimotsukeno no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''shimotsukeno kokuzō'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled {{ill|Shimotsukenu Province|ja|下野国|lt=Shimotsukenu Province|lt_ja=下毛野国}}. Originally the {{ill|Keno no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|毛野国造}}, it split from the {{ill|Kamitsukenu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|上毛野国造}} during the reigns from {{ill|Emperor Nintoku|ja|仁徳天皇}} to {{ill|Emperor Kōtoku|ja|孝徳天皇}}.

== Overview ==
=== Name ===
In the ''{{ill|Kojiki|ja|古事記}}'' it is written '''Shimotsukenu-no-Kimi''', while in the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'' and the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'' it appears as '''Shimotsukenu no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''.

=== Ancestry ===
* According to the ''Kojiki'', '''{{ill|Toyoki-Iribiko-no-Mikoto|ja|豊木入日子命}}''', prince of {{ill|Emperor Sujin|ja|崇神天皇}}, is said to be the ancestor of the Kamitsukenu-no-Kimi, Shimotsukenu-no-Kimi, and others.
* According to the ''Nihon Shoki'', Emperor Sujin's prince Toyoki-Irihiko-no-Mikoto was ordered to rule the eastern provinces and became the ancestor of the Kamitsukenu no Kuni no Miyatsuko, Shimotsukenu no Kuni no Miyatsuko, and others. His grandson {{ill|Hikosashima-no-Ōkimi|ja|彦狭嶋王}} was appointed governor of the fifteen provinces of the {{ill|Tōsandō|ja|東山道}} during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Keikō|ja|景行天皇}}, and his son '''{{ill|Mimorowake-no-Ōkimi|ja|御諸別王}}''' continued to govern well.
* According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'', '''{{ill|Narawake|ja|奈良別}}''', a 4th-generation descendant of Toyoki-Irihiko-no-Mikoto, was appointed Shimotsukenu no Kuni no Miyatsuko during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Nintoku|ja|仁徳天皇}}.

=== Clan ===
{{ill|Shimotsukeno clan|ja|下毛野氏}} (''shimotsukeno-uji''; {{ill|kabane|ja|姓}} of {{ill|Kimi (kabane)|ja|キミ (カバネ)|lt=Kimi|lt_ja=君}}). They were granted the {{ill|Ason|ja|朝臣}} kabane in {{ill|Emperor Tenmu|ja|天武天皇}} 13 ({{ill|684|ja|684年}}). In {{ill|Enryaku|ja|延暦}} 2 ({{ill|783|ja|783年}}), surrendering Emishi were granted the Shimotsukeno surname.

== Base ==
The kuni no miyatsuko's base may have been around {{ill|Iizuka, Oyama|ja|宇都宮市|lt=Iizuka, Oyama City|lt_ja=小山市飯塚}}.

=== Territory ===
The territory of the kuni no miyatsuko was the region then known as '''Shimotsukenu Province''', corresponding to the later {{ill|Shimotsuke Province|ja|下野国}} minus {{ill|Nasu Province|ja|那須国}}, i.e. present-day southwestern {{ill|Tochigi Prefecture|ja|栃木県}}.

In {{ill|antiquity|ja|古代}}, along the {{ill|Kinu River|ja|鬼怒川|lt=Keno River|lt_ja=毛野川}} basin flowing into {{ill|Katori Sea|ja|香取海}}, a great clan descended from {{ill|Emperor Sujin|ja|崇神天皇}}'s prince {{ill|Toyoki-Irihiko-no-Mikoto|ja|豊城入彦命}} formed {{ill|Keno Province|ja|毛野国}} (''keno'' no kuni) and wielded great influence at the {{ill|Yamato court|ja|大和朝廷}}, but afterwards Keno Province was divided into Shimotsukenu Province and Kamitsukenu Province ({{ill|Kōzuke Province|ja|上野国}}). From ancient times Shimotsukenu Province lay along the Keno River basin flowing into Katori Sea, but through the {{ill|Tone River eastward redirection project|ja|利根川東遷事業}} it became part of the Keno River basin flowing into the {{ill|Tone River|ja|利根川}}; its territory corresponds roughly to present-day {{ill|Tochigi Prefecture|ja|栃木県}}.

== Tutelary Shrines ==
*{{ill|Nikkō Futarasan Shrine|ja|日光二荒山神社}}
*: A shrine in {{ill|Nikkō, Tochigi|ja|日光市|lt=Nikkō City|lt_ja=日光市}} in {{ill|Tochigi Prefecture|ja|栃木県}}. The enshrined deities are the ancestral Futarasan deity of the kuni no miyatsuko ({{ill|Ōnamuchi-no-Mikoto|ja|大己貴命}}, {{ill|Tagori-hime|ja|田心姫命|lt=Tagorihime-no-Mikoto|lt_ja=田心姫命}}, {{ill|Ajisukitakahikone|ja|味耜高彦根命|lt=Ajisukitakahikone-no-Mikoto|lt_ja=味耜高彦根命}}). First shrine of Shimotsuke Province.
*{{ill|Utsunomiya Futarasan Shrine|ja|宇都宮二荒山神社}}
*: A shrine in {{ill|Utsunomiya|ja|宇都宮市|lt=Utsunomiya City|lt_ja=宇都宮市}} in Tochigi Prefecture. The enshrined deities include the ancestor of the kuni no miyatsuko, {{ill|Toyoki-Irihiko-no-Mikoto|ja|豊城入彦命}}. First shrine of Shimotsuke Province.
*{{ill|Akagi Shrine|ja|赤城神社}}
*: A shrine in {{ill|Sano, Tochigi|ja|佐野市|lt=Sano City|lt_ja=佐野市}} in Tochigi Prefecture. The enshrined deity is the ancestor of the kuni no miyatsuko, {{ill|Hikosashima-no-Ōkimi|ja|彦狭嶋王}}.

== Descendants ==
*{{ill|Shimotsukeno-no-Komaro|ja|下毛野古麻呂}}
*: An official of the {{ill|Asuka period|ja|飛鳥時代}}. He, {{ill|Prince Osakabe|ja|忍壁皇子|lt=Prince Osakabe|lt_ja=刑部親王}}, {{ill|Fujiwara no Fuhito|ja|藤原不比等}}, {{ill|Awata no Mahito|ja|粟田真人}}, and others selected the {{ill|Taihō Code|ja|大宝律令}}.
*{{ill|Shimotsukeno-no-Mushimaro|ja|下毛野虫麻呂}}
*: A scholar of the {{ill|Nara period|ja|奈良時代}}. Shikibu-Gai-no-shōyū. Excellent at composition.
*{{ill|Shimotsukeno-no-Toshitsugu|ja|下毛野年継}}
*: An official of the {{ill|Heian period|ja|平安時代}}. Kannu-no-kami. Junior Fifth Rank Upper.
*{{ill|Shimotsukeno-no-Kintoki|ja|下毛野公時}}
*: A warrior of the Heian period. Sumō-no-tsukai. {{ill|Zuijin|ja|随身}} to {{ill|Fujiwara no Michinaga|ja|藤原道長}}. Said to be the model for Kintarō.
*{{ill|Shimotsukeno-no-Kintada|ja|下毛野公忠}}
*: A warrior of the Heian period. Konoe-no-toneri. Bodyguard to {{ill|Fujiwara no Yorimichi|ja|藤原頼通}}.

== See also ==
*{{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}

== References ==
*''Kokushi Daijiten'' (Yoshikawa Kōbunkan)
*Sakamoto Tarō, Hirano Kunio, ''Nihon Kodai Shizoku Jinmei Jiten'' (Yoshikawa Kōbunkan)
*''Nihon-shi Kō-jiten'' (Yamakawa Shuppansha)
*''Shintō Daijiten'' (Rinsen Shoten)

{{DEFAULTSORT:しもつけぬのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:日本の歴史関連のスタブ項目]]
[[Category:下野国]]
[[Category:栃木県の歴史]]
[[Category:下毛野氏|*しもつけの]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:下毛野国造]]
