{{nihongo|'''Tanba no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''|丹波国造|''tanba no kuni no miyatsuko''}} was a [[kuni no miyatsuko]] who ruled the area covered by the later {{ill|ritsuryō provinces|ja|令制国}} of [[Tanba Province]], [[Tajima Province]], and [[Tango Province]], corresponding to the central and northern parts of modern [[Kyoto Prefecture]], the northern and the east of central [[Hyōgo Prefecture]], and part of [[Osaka Prefecture]].

== Overview ==
According to Volume 10, the "Kokuzō Hongi", of the {{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}, during the reign of [[Emperor Seimu]], {{ill|Ōkurashi-no-Mikoto|ja|大倉岐命}}, a 4th-generation descendant of {{ill|Taketanane-no-Mikoto|ja|建稲根命}} who shared the same ancestor as the {{ill|Owari-no-Muraji|ja|尾張連}}, was appointed kuni no miyatsuko, marking the beginning of the line. The {{ill|Amabe Clan Genealogy|ja|海部氏系図}}, a [[National Treasure (Japan)|National Treasure]] preserved at [[Kono Shrine]] in [[Miyazu, Kyoto|Miyazu]], Kyoto Prefecture, is said to list the name Ōkurashi-no-Mikoto as its 16th generation.

The {{ill|Kameoka Basin|ja|亀岡盆地}}, in the southern part of the Tanba no Kuni no Miyatsuko's territory, was in ancient times a great lake, and because beautiful {{ill|vermillion|ja|朱色|lt=cinnabar-colored}} waves would rise when the wind blew, the area came to be called "Ni-no-umi" (Sea of Cinnabar) or "Tanba" (cinnabar waves). Legend also holds that [[Ōkuninushi|Ōkuninushi-no-Mikoto]], famous from the [[Izumo (ancient Japan)|Izumo]] [[mythology]], opened the gorge between [[Kameoka, Kyoto|Kameoka]] and [[Arashiyama]] to drain the water and reclaim the land, naming the newly opened gorge the "[[Hozu River]] / {{ill|Hozu Gorge|ja|保津峡}}" after the name of his consort goddess "{{ill|Mihotsuhime|ja|三穂津姫|lt=Mihotsuhime-no-Mikoto}}"; this deity is enshrined as the principal deity of [[Izumo-Daijingu]] (in Chitose-chō, Kameoka).<ref>{{cite web|url=http://www.izumo-d.org/|title=Izumo-Daijingu, Ichinomiya of Tanba Province|accessdate=7 October 2007}}</ref> In fact, geological strata showing that the area was once a lake have been confirmed. Though it is uncertain, the Katsura River within Kameoka is said to be called the "Ōi River" because the Hata clan is said to have carried out flood-control works on the Katsura River in the Kameoka area in the 5th century.

Around the [[6th century]], a woman with the name "Tanba" became the consort of an [[emperor of Japan|emperor]],<ref>The ''Nihon Shoki'' states that Taneno-hime of Tanba became the consort of [[Emperor Kaika]]. The ''Kojiki'' records that the same emperor took Takeno-hime, daughter of Tanba-no-Ōagata-no-Yugori, as his consort.</ref> indicating that the name "Tanba" existed from ancient times.

=== Tutelary shrine, etc. ===
* [[Kono Shrine]]

=== Descendants ===
* {{ill|Amabe clan|ja|海部氏}}
: The priestly {{ill|shake|ja|社家}} family of Kono Shrine is still the Amabe clan today, and the current [[chief priest]] claims to be the 82nd-generation Tanba no Kuni no Miyatsuko.

== Notes ==
{{Reflist}}

== See also ==
* {{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}
{{令制国一覧}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:たんはのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:丹波国]]
[[Category:但馬国]]
[[Category:丹後国]]
[[Category:京都府の歴史]]
[[Category:兵庫県の歴史]]
[[Category:大阪府の歴史]]
[[Category:日本の歴史関連のスタブ項目]]
{{Japanese-history-stub}}
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:丹波国造]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
