{{日本の氏族
|家名 = Kunu no Kuni no Miyatsuko
|家紋 = <!-- family crest image -->
|家紋名称 =
|本姓 = {{ill|Kunu clan|ja|久能氏|lt=Kunu clan|lt_ja=久努氏}} (Atai)
|家祖 = {{ill|Inabasukune|ja|印幡足尼}}
|種別 = {{ill|Shinbetsu|ja|神別}} ({{ill|Tenson|ja|天孫}})
|出身地 = {{ill|Yamato Province|ja|大和国|lt=Ōyamato|lt_ja=大倭国}}
|根拠地 = Kunu Province (later {{ill|Tōtōmi Province|ja|遠江国}})
|人物 = See [[#People|People]]
|支流 = (kabane in parentheses)<br />{{ill|Tōtsuōmi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|遠淡海国造}}<br />{{ill|Saya clan|ja|佐夜氏}} (Atai)<br />{{ill|Suruga no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|珠流河国造}}<br />{{ill|Kanasashi clan|ja|金刺氏}}<br />{{ill|Ochi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|小市国造}}<br />{{ill|Ochi clan|ja|越智氏|lt=Ochi clan|lt_ja=小市氏}} (Atai)<br />{{ill|Kazahaya no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|風速国造}}<br />{{ill|Kazahaya clan|ja|風速氏}} (Atai)
}}
{{nihongo|'''Kunu no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''|久努国造|''kuno no kuni no miyatsuko'' / ''kunu no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''kuno kokuzō'' / ''kunu kokuzō''}} was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled [[#Territory|Kunu Province]] (the central part of Tōtōmi Province).

== Overview ==
=== Name ===
Recorded as '''Kunu no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' in the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}''.

=== Ancestry ===
* The "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'' records that '''{{ill|Inabasukune|ja|印幡足尼}}''' (''inibasukune'', ''inabasukune''), grandson of {{ill|Ikagashikoo-no-Mikoto|ja|伊香色雄命}} — ancestor of the {{ill|Mononobe-no-Muraji|ja|物部氏|lt=Mononobe-no-Muraji|lt_ja=物部連}} — was appointed during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Chūai|ja|仲哀天皇}}.
* The "Tenson Hongi" and "Kokuzō Hongi" state that '''Inikibi-no-Muraji-no-Kimi''', said to be the son of either Ikagashikoo-no-Mikoto or {{ill|Mononobe-no-Tochine|ja|物部十千根|lt=Tochine|lt_ja=十千根}}-no-{{ill|Ōmuraji|ja|大連|lt=Ōmuraji|lt_ja=大連}}, was "the ancestor of the Shiki Agatanushi, the Tōtōmi no Kuni no Miyatsuko, the Kunu-no-Atai, and the Saya-no-Atai."

=== Clan ===
The '''{{ill|Kunu clan|ja|久能氏|lt=Kunu clan|lt_ja=久努氏}}''' (''kunu-uji'', ''kuno-uji''; {{ill|kabane|ja|姓}} of {{ill|Atai (kabane)|ja|直 (姓)|lt=Atai|lt_ja=直}}), kin to the {{ill|Saya clan|ja|佐夜氏}}.

== Base ==
The kuni no miyatsuko's base was '''{{ill|Kunu-gō|ja|久努村|lt=Kunu-gō|lt_ja=久努郷}}''' in {{ill|Yamana District|ja|山名郡}} of the later {{ill|Tōtōmi Province|ja|遠江国}}, identified with present-day Washinosu and Kuno in {{ill|Fukuroi, Shizuoka|ja|袋井市|lt=Fukuroi City|lt_ja=袋井市}} in {{ill|Shizuoka Prefecture|ja|静岡県}}.<ref>{{ill|Shimonaka Makoto|ja|下中真人}}, "Yamana District", in ''Place Names of Shizuoka Prefecture: Nihon Rekishi Chimei Taikei 22'', {{ill|Heibonsha|ja|平凡社}}, 2000.</ref> Nearby place names such as Kunimoto and Kuno remain, along with the site of Kuno Castle.

=== Territory ===
The territory of the Kunu no Kuni no Miyatsuko was the region then known as '''Kunu Province''', said to comprise the later Yamana District (Fukuroi City), {{ill|Shūchi District|ja|周智郡}}, and {{ill|Sano District, Shizuoka|ja|佐野郡}}. Some theories place the base of the {{ill|Suga no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|素賀国造}} at {{ill|Soga Village, Shizuoka|ja|曽我村 (静岡県)|lt=Soga|lt_ja=曽我}} in the adjacent Sano District,<ref>Shimonaka Makoto, "Sano District", in ''Place Names of Shizuoka Prefecture: Nihon Rekishi Chimei Taikei 22'', Heibonsha, 2000.</ref> but Yamana District is said to have originally been created in {{ill|Yōrō|ja|養老}} 6 (722) by detaching eight ''gō'' from Saeki District (Sano District, Saya District),<ref>{{ill|Sugano no Mamichi|ja|菅野真道}} et al., "Entry for Yōrō 6, 2nd month, 16th day", ''{{ill|Shoku Nihongi|ja|続日本紀}}'', 797.</ref> so the original territory of the Kunu no Kuni no Miyatsuko would have been Yamana District and Sano District.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
Possibly '''{{ill|Akao-Shibutare-Kōribe Shrine|ja|赤尾渋垂郡辺神社}}''' (''akao-shibutare-kōribe jinja'').<ref>Hōga Toshio, "[http://wwr2.ucom.ne.jp/hetoyc15/keijiban/kunosi.htm The Kuno and Hara Clans]", in ''Koju Ki no Fuma'', 2002.</ref> Within its precincts, {{ill|Inikibi-no-Mikoto|ja|印岐美命}} is enshrined.

=== Related Shrines ===
*'''{{ill|Nanatsumori Shrine|ja|七ツ森神社}}''' (''nanatsumori jinja'')
*: A shrine in Kunimoto, Fukuroi City, enshrining the Kunu no Kuni no Miyatsuko.

=== Tombs ===
*'''{{ill|Zaōgongen Shrine Kofun|ja|蔵王権現神社古墳}}''' (''zaōgongen jinja kofun'')
*: A {{ill|keyhole-shaped kofun (rectangle)|ja|前方後方墳|lt=zenpōkōhōfun|lt_ja=前方後方墳}} 49 m in total length and 4 m in height. Built in the early {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代}} ({{ill|4th century|ja|4世紀}}) and thought to be the tomb of Inabasukune.<ref>Hōga Toshio, "The Preservation Issue of Takaosan Kofun in Numazu", in ''Koju Ki no Fuma'', 2015.</ref>
*'''{{ill|Wadaoka Kofun Cluster|ja|和田岡古墳群}}''' (''wadaoka kofungun'')
**: '''Kakuwakanatsuka Kofun''' (''kakuwakanatsuka kofun'') — A {{ill|keyhole-shaped kofun|ja|前方後円墳}} 66 m in total length, said to have been built in the early {{ill|5th century|ja|5世紀}}.
**: '''Hisagozuka Kofun''' (''hisagozuka kofun'') — A keyhole-shaped kofun 63 m in total length, said to have been built in the first half of the 5th century.
**: '''Gyōninzuka Kofun''' (''gyōninzuka kofun'') — A keyhole-shaped kofun 43 m in total length, variously dated to the 4th or 5th century.
**: '''Yoshioka-Ōtsuka Kofun''' (''yoshioka-ōtsuka kofun'') — A keyhole-shaped kofun 55 m in total length, said to have been built in the mid-5th century.

== References ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
{{Reflist}}

== See also ==
*{{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}
*{{ill|Suga no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|素賀国造}}
{{Japanese-history-stub}}
{{pref-stub|pref=静岡県}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:くののくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:遠江国|くにのみやつこ]]
[[Category:出雲氏|*くののくにのみやつこ]]
[[Category:物部氏|-くののくにのみやつこ]]
[[Category:静岡県の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:久努国造]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
[[Category:Translated but not moved]]