{{日本の氏族
|家名 = Kubiki no Kuni no Miyatsuko
|家紋 = <!-- family crest image -->
|家紋名称 =
|本姓 = {{ill|Kubiki clan|ja|頸城氏}}
|家祖 = {{ill|Mihoko-no-Mikoto|ja|御戈命}}
|種別 = {{ill|Shinbetsu|ja|神別}} ({{ill|Chigi (deities)|ja|地祇|lt=Chigi|lt_ja=地祇}})
|出身地 = {{ill|Yamato Province|ja|大和国|lt=Ōyamato|lt_ja=大倭国}}
|根拠地 = {{ill|Echigo Province|ja|越後国}}
|人物 = See [[#People|People]]
|支流 = {{ill|Ōmi clan|ja|青海氏}} (Obito)
}}
{{nihongo|'''Kubiki no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''|久比岐国造|''kubiki no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''kubiki kokuzō''}} was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled [[#Territory|Kubiki Province]].

== Overview ==
=== Ancestry ===
* According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'', during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Sujin|ja|崇神天皇|lt=Emperor Sujin|lt_ja=崇神朝}}, '''Mihoko-no-Mikoto''', sharing the same ancestor as '''{{ill|Yamato-no-Atai|ja|倭国造|lt=Yamato-no-Atai|lt_ja=大和直}}''', was appointed kuni no miyatsuko.

=== Clan ===
The '''{{ill|Kubiki clan|ja|頸城氏}}''' (''kubiki-uji''; {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} of {{ill|Atai (kabane)|ja|直 (姓)|lt=Atai|lt_ja=直}}). Its descendants include the {{ill|Ōmi clan|ja|青海氏}} (''ōmi-uji''; kabane of {{ill|Obito (kabane)|ja|首 (姓)|lt=Obito|lt_ja=首}}), kin to the {{ill|Yamato no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|倭国造}}. The Ōmi clan is recorded in the ''{{ill|Shinsen Shōjiroku|ja|新撰姓氏録}}'' as descended from Shiinetsuhiko-no-Mikoto.<ref>"Ukyō Shinbetsu, Ōmi-no-Obito", ''Shinsen Shōjiroku'', Kōnin 6 (815).</ref>

== Base ==

=== Territory ===
The kuni no miyatsuko's territory was the region then known as '''Kubiki Province''' — centered on the western part of the later '''{{ill|Kubiki District|ja|頸城郡}}''' of {{ill|Echigo Province|ja|越後国}}, corresponding to present-day {{ill|Itoigawa, Niigata|ja|糸魚川市|lt=Itoigawa City|lt_ja=糸魚川市}}.

Based on kofun distribution and place names like "Fukae", some theories locate the {{ill|Koshi-Fukae no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|高志深江国造}} in {{ill|Kanbara District, Niigata|ja|蒲原郡|lt=Kanbara District|lt_ja=蒲原郡}} or Fukae in {{ill|Nutari District|ja|沼垂郡|lt=Nutari District|lt_ja=沼垂郡}}, and place the Kubiki no Kuni no Miyatsuko's base in {{ill|Jōetsu, Niigata|ja|上越市|lt=Jōetsu City|lt_ja=上越市}} and {{ill|Myōkō, Niigata|ja|妙高市|lt=Myōkō City|lt_ja=妙高市}}.{{Citation needed|date=March 2022}}

Hōga Toshio argues that — since place names related to the kuni no miyatsuko such as the Yamato River, the Ōmi River, {{ill|Ōmi-machi, Niigata|ja|青海町|lt=Ōmi-machi|lt_ja=青海町}}, and Ōmi Shrine are abundant in Itoigawa City but not in Jōetsu or Myōkō; and since the place name "Fukae" appears to have existed within Kubiki District, where the descendant clan of the Koshi-Fukae no Kuni no Miyatsuko resided — the Kubiki no Kuni no Miyatsuko's base is more appropriately placed in Itoigawa City.<ref>Hōga Toshio, "Chapter 2: Koshi and the Abe Clan", in ''Koshi to Izumo no Yoake'', Hōrei Shuppan, 2008, pp. 70–73.</ref>

== Tutelary Shrine ==
Presumably the {{ill|Engishiki shrine|ja|式内社|lt=shikinaisha|lt_ja=式内社}} '''{{ill|Ōmi Shrine (Itoigawa)|ja|青海神社 (糸魚川市)|lt=Ōmi Shrine|lt_ja=青海神社}}'''. It enshrines {{ill|Shiinetsuhiko|ja|椎根津彦命|lt=Shiinetsuhiko-no-Mikoto|lt_ja=椎根津彦命}}, the kuni no miyatsuko's {{ill|ujigami|ja|祖神|lt=ancestral deity|lt_ja=祖神}}.

=== Related Shrines ===
* {{ill|Ōmiwa Shrine (Itoigawa, Taira)|ja|大神社 (糸魚川市平)|lt=Ōmiwa Shrine|lt_ja=大神社}} (''ōmiwa no kamuyashiro'')
*: A ''shikinaisha'' candidate enshrined in Ōaza Taira of {{ill|Itoigawa, Niigata|ja|糸魚川市|lt=Itoigawa City|lt_ja=糸魚川市}}. It enshrines Mihoko-no-Mikoto (Mihoko-no-Mikoto), the ancestor of the Satō priestly family of the shrine.
* {{ill|Ōmi Shrine (Kamo)|ja|青海神社 (加茂市)|lt=Ōmi Shrine|lt_ja=青海神社}} (''ōmi jinja'')
*: A ''shikinaisha'' candidate enshrined in {{ill|Kamo, Niigata|ja|加茂市|lt=Kamo City|lt_ja=加茂市}}. It enshrines Shiinetsuhiko-no-Mikoto and {{ill|Yamato-no-Ōkunitama|ja|倭大国魂神|lt=Ōkunitama-no-Kami|lt_ja=大國魂神}}.


== Descendants ==
* {{ill|Ōmi-no-Fujin Magako|ja|青海夫人勾子}}
*: A {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代}} figure and court lady during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Kinmei|ja|欽明天皇|lt=Emperor Kinmei|lt_ja=欽明朝}}. The emperor sent her to {{ill|Ōtomo no Kanamura|ja|大伴金村}} when the latter had ceased attending court.

== Notes ==
{{Reflist}}

== See also ==
* {{ill|Echigo Province|ja|越後国}}
* {{ill|Itoigawa, Niigata|ja|糸魚川市}}
* {{ill|Koshi-Fukae no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|高志深江国造}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:くびきのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:頸城氏|*]]
[[Category:越後国]]
[[Category:新潟県の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:久比岐国造]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
