{{日本の氏族
|家名 = Kuji no Kuni no Miyatsuko
|家紋 = <!-- family crest image -->
|家紋名称 =
|本姓 = Unknown
|家祖 = {{ill|Funase-no-Sukune|ja|船瀬足尼}}
|種別 = {{ill|Shinbetsu|ja|神別}} ({{ill|Tenshin|ja|天津神・国津神|lt=Tenshin|lt_ja=天神}})
|出身地 = {{ill|Yamato Province|ja|大和国|lt=Ōyamato|lt_ja=大倭国}}
|根拠地 = Kuji Province (later {{ill|Kuji District, Ibaraki|ja|久慈郡}} of {{ill|Hitachi Province|ja|常陸国}})
|人物 =
|支流 = (kabane in parentheses)<br />{{ill|Tōtsuōmi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|遠淡海国造}}<br />{{ill|Suruga no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|珠流河国造}}<br />{{ill|Kanasashi clan|ja|金刺氏}}<br />{{ill|Kunu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|久努国造}}<br />{{ill|Kuno clan|ja|久野氏|lt=Kunu clan|lt_ja=久努氏}} (Atai)<br />{{ill|Saya clan|ja|佐夜氏}} (Atai)<br />{{ill|Ochi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|小市国造}}<br />{{ill|Ochi clan|ja|越智氏|lt=Ochi clan|lt_ja=小市氏}} (Atai)<br />{{ill|Kazahaya no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|風速国造}}<br />{{ill|Kazahaya clan|ja|風速氏}} (Atai)
}}
{{nihongo|'''Kuji no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''|久自国造|''kuji no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''kuji kokuzō''}} was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled the region that later became the northern-central part of {{ill|Hitachi Province|ja|常陸国}} ('''[[#Territory|Kuji Province]]''').

== Overview ==
=== Name ===
"Kuji no Kuni no Miyatsuko" is the form given in the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'' as edited by the Shintō priest {{ill|Watarai Nobuyoshi|ja|出口延佳|lt=Watarai Nobuyoshi|lt_ja=度会延佳}} (''Gōtō Kujiki'')<ref name="taikei">''[[#taikei|Kokushi Taikei, vol. 7]]''.</ref><ref name="taikei2">''[[#taikei2|Shintei Zōho Kokushi Taikei, vol. 7]]''.</ref>, and likewise in the same work's {{ill|Andei era|ja|安貞|lt=Andei-era|lt_ja=安貞}} ancient manuscript owned by the Maeda Marquess family{{refnest|group="注"|name=maeda|The {{ill|Maeda clan|ja|前田氏}}'s {{ill|Maeda line of Toshiie|ja|前田氏#前田利家の前田氏|lt=Maeda line of Toshiie|lt_ja=前田利家の前田氏}} of the {{ill|Kaga Domain|ja|加賀藩}} was made a {{ill|Marquess (Japan)|ja|侯爵#日本の侯爵|lt=marquess|lt_ja=侯爵}} after the {{ill|Meiji Restoration|ja|明治維新}}.<ref>''Kansei Chōshū Shokafu'', ''Kanazawa City History'', ''Hanshi Daijiten''.</ref>}}.<ref name="taikei2"/> In the same work's {{ill|Jingū Bunko|ja|神宮文庫}} text, it is given as "'''Ku<span style="-webkit-text-emphasis: filled circle;">me</span><ref>Kume-gō, {{ill|Kume Village, Ibaraki|ja|久米村 (茨城県)|lt=Kume Village|lt_ja=久米村}}.</ref> no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''".<ref name="taikei2"/>

=== Ancestry ===
* According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'', during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Seimu|ja|成務天皇}}, '''{{ill|Funase-no-Sukune|ja|船瀬足尼}}''' (''Funase-no-Shukune''), a 3rd-generation descendant of '''{{ill|Ikagashikoo-no-Mikoto|ja|伊香色雄|lt=Ikagashikoo-no-Mikoto|lt_ja=伊香色雄命}}''' — ancestor of the {{ill|Mononobe clan|ja|物部氏}} — was appointed first Kuji no Kuni no Miyatsuko. Funase-no-Sukune is also written '''Funase-no-Shukune'''<ref>[http://www.edu.pref.ibaraki.jp/board/bunkazai/ken/shiseki/12-27/12-27.html Bontenzan Kofun Cluster] — {{ill|Ibaraki Prefectural Board of Education|ja|茨城県教育委員会}} (viewed 5 October 2016, 12:12 {{ill|JST|ja|日本標準時|lt=JST|lt_ja=日本標準時}}).</ref> or '''Funase-no-Sukune''' (船瀬足尼).<ref>[http://www.kanko-hitachiota.com/page/page000063.html Bontenzan Kofun Cluster] — {{ill|Hitachiōta City Tourism and Products Association|ja|常陸太田市観光物産協会}} official website (viewed 16 May 2017, 00:30 JST).</ref> "船瀬足尼" is the form used in Watarai Nobuyoshi's edition of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi''<ref name="taikei"/><ref name="taikei2"/> and the Andei-era ancient manuscript of the Maeda Marquess family,<ref group="注" name="maeda"/><ref name="taikei2"/> while the Jingū Bunko text of the same work gives "'''Funasene'''" (船瀬尼),<ref name="taikei2"/> which is considered a scribal error.

=== Clan ===

== Base ==
The later '''{{ill|Kuji District, Ibaraki|ja|久慈郡}}''' of Hitachi Province. Present-day {{ill|Hitachi, Ibaraki|ja|日立市|lt=Hitachi|lt_ja=日立市}} and {{ill|Hitachiōta, Ibaraki|ja|常陸太田市|lt=Hitachiōta|lt_ja=常陸太田市}} in {{ill|Ibaraki Prefecture|ja|茨城県}}, etc. — the area around [[#Tutelary Shrine|Inamura Shrine described below]]. The district office ({{ill|gunga|ja|郡衙}}) site for {{ill|Kuji District, Ibaraki|ja|久慈郡|lt=Kuji District|lt_ja=久慈郡}} is thought to be the '''{{ill|Chōjayashiki Ruins|ja|長者屋敷遺跡}}''', running from Ōsato-chō to Yakuya-chō in {{ill|Hitachiōta, Ibaraki|ja|常陸太田市|lt=Hitachiōta City|lt_ja=常陸太田市}} in Ibaraki Prefecture.

=== Territory ===
The territory of the Kuji no Kuni no Miyatsuko was the region then known as '''Kuji Province'''. Kuji Province pointed to the northern-central part of the later {{ill|ritsuryō provinces|ja|令制国}} of {{ill|Hitachi Province|ja|常陸国}} ({{ill|Kuji District, Ibaraki|ja|久慈郡}}<ref name="nihonjiten">[http://www.nihonjiten.com/data/263233.html Kuji no Kuni no Miyatsuko (Hitachi)] — Nihon Jiten (viewed 25 February 2018, 03:10 JST).</ref>) — namely the {{ill|Kuji River, Ibaraki|ja|久慈川|lt=Kuji River|lt_ja=久慈川}} basin<ref>''[[#chizu|Nihon Rekishi Chizu: Genshi·Kodai Hen, vol. 2]]''.</ref> — corresponding to the present-day area around {{ill|Hitachi, Ibaraki|ja|日立市|lt=Hitachi City|lt_ja=日立市}} and {{ill|Hitachiōta, Ibaraki|ja|常陸太田市|lt=Hitachiōta City|lt_ja=常陸太田市}} in {{ill|Ibaraki Prefecture|ja|茨城県}}.<ref name="nihonjiten"/>

For the origin of the place name, see {{ill|Kuji District#Origin of the district name|ja|久慈郡#郡名の由来|lt=Kuji District, Origin of the district name|lt_ja=久慈郡#郡名の由来}}.

Kuji Province was later combined, with the establishment of the {{ill|ritsuryō provinces|ja|令制国}}, together with six neighboring provinces — {{ill|Tsukuba no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|筑波国造|lt=Tsukuba|lt_ja=筑波国}}, {{ill|Niihari no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|新治国造|lt=Niihari|lt_ja=新治国}}, {{ill|Ibaraki no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|茨木国造|lt=Ibaraki|lt_ja=茨城国}}, {{ill|Naka no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|仲国造|lt=Naka|lt_ja=仲国}}, {{ill|Taka Province|ja|高国|lt=Taka Province|lt_ja=高国}} (Taka Province), and {{ill|Michinokuchi no Kihe Province|ja|道口岐閉国}} — to form Hitachi Province.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
The {{ill|ujigami|ja|氏神}} of the Kuji no Kuni no Miyatsuko is '''{{ill|Inamura Shrine (Hitachiōta)|ja|稲村神社 (常陸太田市)|lt=Inamura Shrine|lt_ja=稲村神社}}''' (''inamura jinja''; also written 稻村神社; {{Coord|36|31|39.33|N|140|30|03.63|E|region:JP-08_type:landmark|name=Inamura Shrine}}) in {{ill|Hitachiōta, Ibaraki|ja|常陸太田市|lt=Hitachiōta City|lt_ja=常陸太田市}} (formerly Kuji District), {{ill|Ibaraki Prefecture|ja|茨城県}}. Its chief enshrined deity is {{ill|Nigihayahi|ja|ニギハヤヒ|lt=Nigihayahi-no-Mikoto|lt_ja=饒速日命}}, ancestor of the kuni no miyatsuko's ancestor Ikagashikoo-no-Mikoto. According to shrine tradition, when the first kuni no miyatsuko Funase-no-Sukune-no-Mikoto was appointed during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Seimu|ja|成務天皇|lt=Seimu|lt_ja=成務}}, he enshrined his great ancestor Nigihayahi-no-Mikoto.

=== Related Shrines ===
* {{ill|Izumi Shrine (Hitachi)|ja|泉神社 (日立市)|lt=Izumi Shrine|lt_ja=泉神社}} (''izumi jinja''; {{Coord|36|31|6.79|N|140|37|29.67|E|region:JP-08_type:landmark|name=Izumi Shrine}})
*: A shrine in {{ill|Hitachi, Ibaraki|ja|日立市|lt=Hitachi City|lt_ja=日立市}} (formerly Kuji District, later {{ill|Taga District|ja|多賀郡}}), Ibaraki Prefecture. It enshrines {{ill|Amenohayatamahime-no-Mikoto|ja|天速玉姫命}}, and is identified with the {{ill|Engishiki shrine (minor)|ja|式内小社|lt=shikinaisha of minor rank|lt_ja=式内小社}} "Amenohayatamahime-no-Mikoto Jinja". According to the shrine's account of its origin ([http://izumi-jinja.sakura.ne.jp/Yuisyo-Page.html Shrine Introduction] — Izumi Shrine official website<ref>Viewed 7 December 2017, 21:49 JST.</ref>), the shrine is said to have been enshrined in this area in "Uji 49 ({{ill|42 BC|ja|紀元前42年}})",<ref group="注">The meaning of "Uji" is unclear. If "Sujin 49" is meant, mechanically converting the year given in the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'' yields {{ill|49 BC|ja|紀元前49年}}.</ref> during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Sujin|ja|崇神天皇}} (the 10th {{ill|emperor of Japan|ja|天皇|lt=emperor of Japan|lt_ja=天皇}}). It also states: "In response to a petition from the Kuji no Kuni no Miyatsuko Funase-no-Shukune (''kuji no miyatsuko funase shukune'', thus), the {{ill|ōmi (ancient Japan)|ja|大臣 (古代日本)|lt=minister|lt_ja=大臣}} Ikagashikoo (''ikagashikoo no mikoto'') received an imperial decree and went to Kuji Province, enshrined Amenohayatamahime-no-Mikoto, and made her the tutelary of the entire Kuji Province — and this is the founding of Izumi Shrine." Taken as historical, this would place Funase-no-Shukune and Ikagashikoo-no-Mikoto, three generations his senior, alive at the same time. Moreover, the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'' states that Funase-no-Sukune's appointment as Kuji no Kuni no Miyatsuko occurred under Emperor Seimu (the 13th emperor), so it conflicts with the tradition that Funase-no-Shukune was already "Kuji no Kuni no Miyatsuko" under Emperor Sujin (the 10th emperor). As for Ikagashikoo-no-Mikoto, the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi''{{'}}s "{{ill|Tennō Hongi|ja|天皇本紀}}" says he became minister in the 2nd month of {{ill|Emperor Kaika|ja|開化天皇}} 8 (Kaika being the 9th emperor); so, assuming he was not afterwards dismissed, he would still have been minister under Emperor Sujin.

=== Tomb ===
* '''{{ill|Bontenzan Kofun|ja|梵天山古墳}}''' (''bontenyama kofun''; {{Coord|36|30|33.98|N|140|29|32.43|E|region:JP-08_type:landmark|name=Bontenzan Kofun}})
*: A {{ill|keyhole-shaped kofun|ja|前方後円墳}} in {{ill|Shima-machi, Hitachiōta|ja|島町_(常陸太田市)|lt=Shima-machi|lt_ja=島町}} (formerly Kuji District), {{ill|Hitachiōta, Ibaraki|ja|常陸太田市|lt=Hitachiōta City|lt_ja=常陸太田市}}, Ibaraki Prefecture, and the principal tumulus of the {{ill|Bontenzan Kofun Cluster|ja|梵天山古墳群}}. Its mound is 151 m long<ref>Onsite explanatory signage.</ref> — the second-largest in Ibaraki Prefecture. The interred figure is traditionally held to be [[#Ancestry|Funase-no-Sukune mentioned above]].

== People ==
* '''Funase-no-Sukune''' (''funase no sukune'')
*: First Kuji no Kuni no Miyatsuko under the reign of {{ill|Emperor Seimu|ja|成務天皇|lt=Emperor Seimu|lt_ja=成務朝}}.

== Notes ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
=== Footnotes ===
{{Reflist|group="注"}}
=== Citations ===
{{Reflist|2}}

== References ==
* ''Kokushi Daijiten'' ({{ill|Yoshikawa Kōbunkan|ja|吉川弘文館}}).
* Sakamoto Tarō and Hirano Kunio, ''Nihon Kodai Ujizoku Jinmei Jiten'' (Yoshikawa Kōbunkan).
* ''Nihonshi Kōjiten'' ({{ill|Yamakawa Shuppansha|ja|山川出版社}}).
* ''Shintō Daijiten'' (Rinsen Shoten).
* {{Cite book|author=|authorlink=|editor={{ill|Keizai Zasshi-sha|ja|経済雑誌社}}|title=Kokushi Taikei, vol. 7|url=https://dl.ndl.go.jp/info:ndljp/pid/991097|accessdate=2017-12-25|year=1901|publisher={{ill|Keizai Zasshi-sha|ja|経済雑誌社}}|isbn=|pages=preface p. 1, main text p. 409|chapter=|ref=taikei}} Link to the {{ill|National Diet Library Digital Collections|ja|国立国会図書館デジタルコレクション}}.
* {{Cite book|author=|authorlink=|editor={{ill|Kuroita Katsumi|ja|黒板勝美}}|title={{ill|Shintei Zōho Kokushi Taikei|ja|国史大系#第3次：新訂増補国史大系|lt=Shintei Zōho Kokushi Taikei|lt_ja=新訂増補國史大系}}, vol. 7|edition=new ed.|year=1998|publisher={{ill|Yoshikawa Kōbunkan|ja|吉川弘文館}}|isbn=4642003088|pages=Sendai Kuji Hongi preface p. 1, preface p. 4, main text p. 144|chapter=|ref=taikei2}}
* {{Cite book|author=|editor={{ill|Kondō Toshitaka|ja|近藤敏喬}}|title=Kodai Gōzoku Keifu Shūran|year=1993|publisher={{ill|Tokyodo Publishing|ja|東京堂出版}}|isbn=4-490-20225-3|page=73, 74|chapter=|ref=keizu}}
* {{Cite book|author=|editor={{ill|Takeuchi Rizō|ja|竹内理三}} et al.|title={{ill|Nihon Rekishi Chizu|ja|日本歴史地図}}: Genshi·Kodai Hen, vol. 2|year=1982|publisher={{ill|Kashiwa Shobō|ja|柏書房}}|isbn=|page=290|chapter=|ref=chizu}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:くしのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:日本の歴史関連のスタブ項目]]
[[Category:常陸国]]
[[Category:茨城県の歴史]]
[[Category:物部氏|-くしのくにのみやつこ]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:久自国造]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
[[Category:Translated but not moved]]