{{nihongo|'''Futakata no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''|二方国造|''futakata no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''futakata kokuzō''}} was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled [[#Territory|Futakata Province]].

== Overview ==
=== Ancestry ===
* According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'', during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Seimu|ja|成務天皇|lt=Emperor Seimu|lt_ja=成務朝}}, '''{{ill|Mineb-no-Mikoto|ja|美尼布命}}''', a grandson of {{ill|Utsurikoma-Ichinu-no-Mikoto|ja|遷狛一奴命}} and of the same lineage as the {{ill|Izumo no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|出雲国造}}, was appointed Futakata no Kuni no Miyatsuko.

=== Clan ===
The '''{{ill|Futakata clan|ja|二方氏}}''' (''futakata-uji''; {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} of {{ill|Atai (kabane)|ja|直 (姓)|lt=Atai|lt_ja=直}}), presumably. Among wooden tablets ({{ill|mokkan|ja|木簡}}) excavated from the Heijō Palace site, persons bearing the clan names Futakata and Futakata-be appear — the latter presumably being the ''bemin'' administered by the former.<ref>{{ill|Suzuki Masanobu|ja|鈴木正信}}, "Part IV, Chapter 1: The Uji-Kabane of the Kuni no Miyatsuko and the 'Names of Provinces' in the Kokuzō Hongi", in ''Nihon Kodai no Shizoku to Keifu Denshō'', {{ill|Yoshikawa Kōbunkan|ja|吉川弘文館}}, 2017, pp. 371–372.</ref>

In the ''{{ill|Harima no Kuni Fudoki|ja|播磨国風土記}}'' account of the summons of kuni no miyatsuko during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Nintoku|ja|仁徳天皇|lt=Emperor Nintoku|lt_ja=仁徳朝}}, the five kuni no miyatsuko of {{ill|Oki no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|意岐国造|lt=Oki|lt_ja=意岐}}, {{ill|Izumo no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|出雲国造|lt=Izumo|lt_ja=出雲}}, {{ill|Hōki no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|伯岐国造|lt=Hōki|lt_ja=伯耆}}, {{ill|Inaba no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|稲葉国造|lt=Inaba|lt_ja=因幡}}, and {{ill|Tajima no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|但遅麻国造|lt=Tajima|lt_ja=但馬}} appear, but the Futakata no Kuni no Miyatsuko does not — a possible indication that its power was already in decline.<ref>{{ill|Hōga Toshio|ja|宝賀寿男}}, "I: The Kinai Court's Subjugation of Izumo and Its Aftermath", in ''Kodai Shizoku no Kenkyū 16: The Izumo and Haji Clans — Rise and Fall of the Proto-Izumo Kingdom'', Aogaki Shuppan, 2020, p. 66.</ref><ref name="houga">Hōga Toshio, "V: Trends in Izumo Province Before the Reign of {{ill|Emperor Sujin|ja|崇神前代|lt=Sujin|lt_ja=崇神前代}}", in ''Kodai Shizoku no Kenkyū 16: The Izumo and Haji Clans — Rise and Fall of the Proto-Izumo Kingdom'', Aogaki Shuppan, 2020, pp. 193–194.</ref>

From the genealogies and the "Kokuzō Hongi" entry, the clan is generally held to be kin to the {{ill|Izumo-no-Omi|ja|出雲国造|lt=Izumo-no-Omi|lt_ja=出雲臣}}.<ref name="houga" />

== Base ==
The kuni no miyatsuko's base was '''Futakata-gō''' in {{ill|Futakata District|ja|二方郡}} of {{ill|Tajima Province|ja|但馬国}}.

=== Territory ===
The kuni no miyatsuko's territory was the region then known as '''Futakata Province''' — centered on the later Futakata District of Tajima Province, corresponding to most of {{ill|Shin'onsen, Hyōgo|ja|新温泉町}} in {{ill|Mikata District, Hyōgo|ja|美方郡}} and part of {{ill|Kami, Hyōgo|ja|香美町}} in the same district. The clan also venerated {{ill|Kamudo Shrine (Toyooka)|ja|神門神社 (豊岡市)|lt=Kamudo Shrine|lt_ja=神門神社}} in Mikata-gō of {{ill|Keta District|ja|気多郡}}.<ref name="houga" />

Though {{ill|round kofun|ja|円墳}} exist, no prominent {{ill|kofun|ja|古墳}} are known.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
'''{{ill|Futakata Shrine|ja|二方神社}}''', the {{ill|Engishiki shrine|ja|式内社}} of {{ill|Futakata District|ja|二方郡}}, enshrining {{ill|Ōnamuchi|ja|大己貴神}}.

=== Related Shrines ===
* {{ill|Ōtoshi Shrine (Shin'onsen)|ja|大歳神社 (新温泉町)|lt=Ōtoshi Shrine|lt_ja=大歳神社}} (''ōtoshi jinja'')
*: A ''shikinaisha'' enshrined in Igumi, {{ill|Shin'onsen, Hyōgo|ja|新温泉町|lt=Shin'onsen-chō|lt_ja=新温泉町}}. Like the kindred {{ill|Shimazu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|島津国造}}, it enshrines {{ill|Ōtoshi|ja|大年神|lt=Ōtoshi-no-Kami|lt_ja=大歳神}}.
* {{ill|Menuma Shrine|ja|面沼神社}} (''menuma jinja'')
*: A ''shikinaisha'' enshrined in Takeda, Shin'onsen-chō. It enshrines Mineb-no-Mikoto, the kuni no miyatsuko's founding ancestor.
* {{ill|Kamudo Shrine (Toyooka)|ja|神門神社 (豊岡市)|lt=Kamudo Shrine|lt_ja=神門神社}} (''kamuto jinja'')
*: A ''shikinaisha'' enshrined in Hidaka-chō, {{ill|Toyooka, Hyōgo|ja|豊岡市|lt=Toyooka City|lt_ja=豊岡市}}. It enshrines the ancestor of the Kamudo clan from which the kuni no miyatsuko descended.

== Notes ==
{{Reflist}}

== See also ==
* {{ill|San'indō|ja|山陰道}}
* {{ill|Izumo no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|出雲国造}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:ふたかたのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:出雲氏|*ふたかたのくにのみやつこ]]
[[Category:但馬国]]
[[Category:兵庫県の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:二方国造]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
