{{nihongo|'''Naka no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''|仲国造|''naka no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''naka kokuzō''}} was a [[kuni no miyatsuko]] who ruled [[#Territory|Naka Province]]. Also written Naka no Kuni no Miyatsuko (那珂国造 / 那賀国造) or Hitachi-Naka no Kuni no Miyatsuko (常道仲国造).

== Overview ==
In the ''[[Kojiki]]'' it is written '''Hitachi-Naka no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''hitachi no naka no kuni no miyatsuko''); in the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the {{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}, '''Naka no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (仲国造); and in the ''{{ill|Hitachi no Kuni Fudoki|ja|常陸国風土記}}'', '''Naka no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (那珂国造).

=== Ancestry ===
* The ''Kojiki'' names [[Kamuyaimimi-no-Mikoto]] as the ancestor of the kuni no miyatsuko.
* The "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'' records that, during the reign of [[Emperor Seimu]], '''{{ill|Take-Karima-no-Mikoto|ja|建借間命}}''', who shared the same ancestor as the {{ill|Iyo no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|伊予国造|lt=Iyo no Kuni no Miyatsuko}}, was appointed Naka no Kuni no Miyatsuko.

=== Clan ===
The '''{{ill|Mibu clan (ancient)|ja|壬生氏 (古代)|lt=Mibu clan}}''' (''mibu-uji''; [[kabane]] of [[Atai (kabane)|Atai]]), a kin of the [[imperial-descent clan]] '''{{ill|Ō clan|ja|多氏|lt=Ō clan}}'''. Other kuni no miyatsuko of the same clan include the {{ill|Iyo no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|伊予国造}}, {{ill|Shinano no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|科野国造}}, {{ill|Iwaki no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|石城国造}}, {{ill|Tsuge no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|闘鶏国造}}, {{ill|Aso no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|阿蘇国造}}, and {{ill|Hi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|火国造}}.{{Citation needed|date=May 2022}} Its descendants include the {{ill|Nagasa no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|長狭国造}}, {{ill|Inba no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|印波国造}}, and the Niwa Agatanushi.

== Base ==
=== Territory ===
The kuni no miyatsuko's territory was the region then known as '''Naka Province''', corresponding to the later '''{{ill|Naka District, Ibaraki|ja|那珂郡|lt=Naka District}}''' of [[Hitachi Province]] — present-day [[Hitachinaka, Ibaraki|Hitachinaka]] and related areas in [[Ibaraki Prefecture]].

== Tutelary Shrine ==
Possibly '''{{ill|Ōi Shrine (Mito)|ja|大井神社 (水戸市)|lt=Ōi Shrine}}''', an {{ill|Engishiki shrine|ja|式内社|lt=shikinaisha}} of {{ill|Naka District, Ibaraki|ja|那珂郡|lt=Naka District}}. It enshrines Take-Karima-no-Mikoto, the first kuni no miyatsuko.

=== Tombs ===
* '''{{ill|Isohama Kofun Cluster|ja|磯浜古墳群}}''' (''isohama kofungun'')
*: A {{ill|kofun cluster|ja|古墳群}} in [[Ōarai, Ibaraki|Ōarai-machi]], Ibaraki Prefecture, considered the tombs of the Naka no Kuni no Miyatsuko.<ref>"Kagamizuka Kofun Cluster", in ''Nihon Rekishi Chimei Taikei 8: Place Names of Ibaraki Prefecture'', Heibonsha, 1982.</ref>
* '''{{ill|Atagoyama Kofun (Mito)|ja|愛宕山古墳 (水戸市)|lt=Atagoyama Kofun}}''' (''atagoyama kofun'')
*: A [[keyhole-shaped kofun]] 136 metres in total length in [[Mito, Ibaraki|Mito City]], Ibaraki Prefecture, dated to the early [[5th century]]; considered the chieftain's tomb of the Naka no Kuni no Miyatsuko.

== Descendants ==
* [[Daiken]] {{ill|Mibu-no-Fuko|ja|壬生夫子}}
*: A [[Kofun period]] figure, said to have served as Naka no Kuni no Miyatsuko.

== Notes ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
=== Footnotes ===
{{notelist}}
=== Citations ===
{{Reflist}}

== References ==
* ''Kokushi Daijiten'' ([[Yoshikawa Kōbunkan]]).
* ''Nihon Kodai Ujizoku Jinmei Jiten'' (Yoshikawa Kōbunkan).
* ''Nihonshi Kōjiten'' ([[Yamakawa Shuppansha]]).
* ''Shintō Daijiten'' ([[Rinsen Shoten]]).

== See also ==
* {{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}
* {{ill|Atagoyama Kofun (Mito)|ja|愛宕山古墳 (水戸市)|lt=Atagoyama Kofun (Mito)}}
* {{ill|Ōi Shrine (Mito)|ja|大井神社 (水戸市)|lt=Ōi Shrine (Mito)}}
* {{ill|Ōi Shrine (Kasama)|ja|大井神社 (笠間市)|lt=Ōi Shrine (Kasama)}}
* {{ill|Ōō Kofun Cluster|ja|大生古墳群}}
* {{ill|Ōō Shrine|ja|大生神社}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:なかのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:日本の歴史関連のスタブ項目]]
[[Category:常陸国]]
[[Category:茨城県の歴史]]
[[Category:多氏|#なかのくにのみやつこ]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:仲国造]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
