{{nihongo|'''Ijimi no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''|伊甚国造|''ijimi no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''ijimi kokuzō''}} was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled the later {{ill|Hanyu District, Chiba|ja|上埴生郡|lt=Hanyu District|lt_ja=埴生郡}} and {{ill|Nagara District, Chiba|ja|長柄郡}} of {{ill|Kazusa Province|ja|上総国}} under the {{ill|ritsuryō provinces|ja|令制国}} system (present-day {{ill|Chōsei District, Chiba|ja|長生郡市|lt=Chōsei District and Municipality|lt_ja=長生郡市}} in {{ill|Chiba Prefecture|ja|千葉県}}). His {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} was {{ill|Atai (kabane)|ja|直 (姓)|lt=Atai|lt_ja=直}}. Before the establishment of {{ill|Ijimi Miyake|ja|伊甚屯倉}}, he is thought to have also ruled {{ill|Isumi District|ja|夷隅郡|lt=Ishumi District|lt_ja=夷灊郡}}. As for the writing: the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'' and the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'' give '''Ijimi''' no Kuni no Miyatsuko (伊甚), while the ''{{ill|Kojiki|ja|古事記}}'' gives '''Ijimu''' no Kuni no Miyatsuko (伊自牟; ''ijimu-'').

== Explanation ==
According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'', during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Seimu|ja|成務天皇}}, Ikoroto-no-Atai, grandson of Ikohoto-no-Mikoto — ancestor of the {{ill|Awa no Kuni no Miyatsuko (Bōsō)|ja|阿波国造|lt=Awa no Kuni no Miyatsuko|lt_ja=安房国造}} — was appointed Ijimi no Kuni no Miyatsuko.<ref>''Sendai Kuji Hongi'', Vol. 10, "Kokuzō Hongi".</ref> Meanwhile, the ''Kojiki'' names {{ill|Take-Hiratori-no-Mikoto|ja|建比良鳥命}}, son of {{ill|Amenohohi|ja|アメノホヒ|lt=Amenohohi-no-Mikoto|lt_ja=天之菩卑能命}}, as the ancestor of the Ijimu no Kuni no Miyatsuko.<ref group="注">The ''Kojiki'' states: "Take-Hiratori-no-Mikoto was the ancestor of the {{ill|Izumo no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|出雲国造}}, the {{ill|Musashi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|武蔵国造|lt=Musashi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|lt_ja=无邪志国造}}, the {{ill|Kami-tsu-Unakami no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|上海上国造|lt=Kami-tsu-Unakami no Kuni no Miyatsuko|lt_ja=上菟上国造}}, the {{ill|Shimo-tsu-Unakami no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|下海上国造|lt=Shimo-tsu-Unakami no Kuni no Miyatsuko|lt_ja=下菟上国造}}, the Ijimu no Kuni no Miyatsuko, the {{ill|Tsushima Agatanushi|ja|津島県直}}, the {{ill|Tōtōmi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|遠江国造}}, and others."</ref><ref>''Kojiki'', Volume 1, Amaterasu-Ōmikami and Susanoo-no-Mikoto section.</ref>

The Ijimi no Kuni no Miyatsuko is thought to have ruled the basins of the {{ill|Isumi River|ja|夷隅川}} and the {{ill|Ichinomiya River (Chiba)|ja|一宮川|lt=Ichinomiya River|lt_ja=一宮川}}. In the {{ill|Chōnan, Chiba|ja|長南町|lt=Chōnan|lt_ja=長南町}} area, large {{ill|keyhole-shaped kofun|ja|前方後円墳}} of the {{ill|4th century|ja|4世紀}} such as the {{ill|Nōmanji Kofun|ja|能満寺古墳}} and {{ill|Aburadono Kofun Cluster|ja|油殿古墳群|lt=Aburadono No. 1 Kofun|lt_ja=油殿一号墳}} suggest the presence of a chieftain power in the early {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代}}. However, from the {{ill|5th century|ja|5世紀}} onward, no large keyhole-shaped kofun were built.<ref name="千">''Place Names of Chiba Prefecture (Nihon Rekishi Chimei Taikei 12)'', p. 840.</ref>

The ''Nihon Shoki'' contains a record of the offering of the Ijimi Miyake. According to the entry for the 1st day of the 4th month of {{ill|Emperor Ankan|ja|安閑天皇}} 1 ({{ill|534|ja|534年}}), the ''Naizen-no-kami'' (head chef), {{ill|Kashiwade-no-Omi-Ōmaro|ja|膳大麻呂|lt=Kashiwade-no-Omi-Ōmaro|lt_ja=膳臣大麻呂}}, ordered the Ijimi no Kuni no Miyatsuko to offer pearls; when the miyatsuko was late with the offering and was about to be arrested, the miyatsuko {{ill|Ijimi Wakago|ja|伊甚稚子}} fled and hid in the sleeping quarters of {{ill|Kasuga-no-Yamada-no-Himemiko|ja|春日山田皇女|lt=Kasuga-no-Yamada Empress|lt_ja=春日山田皇后}}. The empress was so startled that she fainted, aggravating his offense; as atonement, Wakago presented the Ijimi Miyake to Kasuga-no-Yamada Empress, and this is said to have become the later Ishumi District.<ref>''Nihon Shoki'', Vol. 18, Emperor Ankan Year 1, 4th month, 1st day entry.</ref> Because the text says "now it has been divided into a district", it must have been a vast miyake whose territory extended not only to Ishumi District but also to Hanyu District and Nagara District to the north.<ref name="日">''Nihon Kodaishi Chimei Jiten'', p. 239.</ref>

Though the ''Nihon Shoki'' account cannot be accepted at face value, a name — Kasugabe-no-Atai Kuronushime — of Ishumi District appears in the entry for the 20th day of the 4th month of {{ill|Jōgan (Japan)|ja|貞観 (日本)|lt=Jōgan|lt_ja=貞観}} 9 ({{ill|867|ja|867年}}) of the later ''{{ill|Nihon Sandai Jitsuroku|ja|日本三代実録}}'', so the establishment of a {{ill|miyake|ja|屯倉}} is regarded as historical.<ref>''Kadokawa Nihon Chimei Daijiten 12: Chiba Prefecture'', p. 102.</ref><ref name="日"/> Such miyake establishments exemplify the pattern by which the {{ill|Yamato Kingship|ja|ヤマト王権}} drove wedges of directly administered land into the territories of regional chieftains to extend its power.<ref>''Place Names of Chiba Prefecture'', p. 670.</ref> In the {{ill|6th century|ja|6世紀}}, the {{ill|Muzasa no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|武社国造}}, a branch of the {{ill|Wani clan|ja|和珥氏}} — the {{ill|maternal relatives|ja|外戚}} of Kasuga-no-Yamada Empress — is also said to have advanced into the central part of the {{ill|Kujūkuri coast|ja|九十九里浜|lt=Kujūkuri coast|lt_ja=九十九里浜}} to the northeast,<ref>''Shoku Nihongi 4'', supplementary note 29-60.</ref> and the ''{{ill|Shoku Nihon Kōki|ja|続日本後紀}}'' entry for the 16th day of the 3rd month of {{ill|Jōwa (Japan)|ja|承和 (日本)|lt=Jōwa|lt_ja=承和}} 2 ({{ill|835|ja|835年}}) records the founding of {{ill|Sōsa District|ja|匝瑳郡}} for the meritorious service of {{ill|Mononobe-no-Ko-Koto|ja|物部小事|lt=Ko-Koto|lt_ja=小事}}, younger brother of {{ill|Mononobe-no-Ikoji|ja|物部木蓮子}} (i.e. uncle of {{ill|Yakahime|ja|宅媛}}, another consort of Emperor Ankan).<ref>''Kadokawa Nihon Chimei Daijiten 12: Chiba Prefecture'', p. 495.</ref> This may reflect a decline of the regional chieftain power in this area in the middle and late Kofun period.<ref name="千"/>

== Notes ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
=== Footnotes ===
{{Reflist|group=注}}
=== Citations ===
{{Reflist|2}}

== References ==
* Ogasawara Nagakazu (supervisor), ''Place Names of Chiba Prefecture (Nihon Rekishi Chimei Taikei 12)'', Heibonsha, 1996, ISBN 4-582-49012-3, pp. 670, 840.
* Kadokawa Nihon Chimei Daijiten Hensan Iinkai (ed.), ''Kadokawa Nihon Chimei Daijiten 12: Chiba Prefecture'', Kadokawa Shoten, 1984, ISBN 4-04-001120-1, pp. 102, 495.
* Tenri University Press Editorial Committee, ''Sendai Kuji Hongi (Tenri Library Zenpon Sōsho Washo-no-bu Vol. 41)'', Tenri University Press, 1978, p. 632.
* Ogihara Asao (trans.), ''Nihon no Koten Kanyaku (1): Kojiki'', Shōgakukan, 1983, ISBN 4-09-556001-0, p. 37.
* Sakamoto Tarō et al., ''Nihon Shoki (3) (Iwanami Bunko)'', Iwanami Shoten, 1994, ISBN 4-00-300043-9, p. 214.
* Ujitani Tsutomu (trans.), ''Nihon Shoki (Jō) Zen Gendaigoyaku (Kōdansha Gakujutsu Bunko)'', Kōdansha, 1988, ISBN 4-06-158833-8, p. 370.
* Katō Kenkichi et al., ''Nihon Kodaishi Chimei Jiten'', {{ill|Yūzankaku|ja|雄山閣}}, 2007, ISBN 978-4-639-01995-4, p. 239.
* Aoki Kazuo et al., ''Shoku Nihongi 4'', Iwanami Shoten, 1995, ISBN 4-00-240015-8, p. 529.

== See also ==
*{{ill|Nashiro|ja|名代}}

== External links ==
* [http://www.haniwakan.com/kenkyu/boso/izi.html Walking the Ancient Tombs of Bōsō: The Tombs of Ijimi Province]

{{Japanese-history-stub}}
{{デフォルトソート:いしみのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:上総国]]
[[Category:千葉県の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:伊甚国造]]
