{{nihongo|'''Shinobu no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''|信夫国造|''shinobu no kuni no miyatsuko''}} was a [[kuni no miyatsuko]] who ruled '''Shinobu Province''' in the {{ill|Fukushima Basin|ja|福島盆地}} along the [[Abukuma River]]—an area corresponding, under the [[ritsuryō provinces|ritsuryō system]], to {{ill|Shinobu District|ja|信夫郡|lt=Shinobu District (Shinobu no kōri)}} of [[Mutsu Province]] (present-day [[Fukushima, Fukushima|Fukushima City]] in [[Fukushima Prefecture]], which encompasses the former Shinobu District, as well as [[Date, Fukushima|Date City]] and {{ill|Date District, Fukushima|ja|伊達郡|lt=Date District}}).

== Outline ==
=== Ancestry ===
* According to Volume 10, the "Kokuzō Hongi", of the {{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}, during the reign of [[Emperor Seimu]], '''Kuma-no-Atai''' (くまのあたい), grandson of Kushiima-no-Mikoto (who shared the same ancestor as the {{ill|Aki no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|阿岐国造}}), was appointed kuni no miyatsuko, marking the beginning of the line.

=== Lineage ===
Likely the {{ill|Hasetsukabe clan|ja|丈部氏}} (''hasetsukabe-uji''; [[kabane]] of {{ill|Atai|ja|直 (姓)}}). The first kuni no miyatsuko is recorded with the kabane of Atai, but in {{ill|Jingo-keiun|ja|神護景雲}} 3 ([[769]]), the kabane '''Abe-Shinobu no [[Omi (rank)|Omi]]''' was granted to the previously un-kabaned Hasetsukabe-no-Ōba and others.

Under the {{ill|ritsuryō|ja|律令制}} system, the area briefly—from {{ill|Yōrō|ja|養老}} 2 (718) until Yōrō 6 (722) or the 3rd month of {{ill|Jinki|ja|神亀}} 1 (724)—was separated from Mutsu Province to form part of {{ill|Iwase Province|ja|石背国}}. Until the construction of [[Taga Castle]], which marked the {{ill|Yamato court's northward expansion|ja|大和朝廷の北進}}, this region was the northernmost limit of the reach of the [[Yamato Kingship]] and stood in confrontation with the {{ill|Emishi|ja|蝦夷}}.

Topographically, the Date-gō area (later Kunimi-machi in Date District), which was once part of Shinobu District, is where the {{ill|Abukuma Highlands|ja|阿武隈山地}}—down which the Abukuma River carves its valley—close in from the northeast, and the {{ill|Ōu Mountains|ja|奥羽山脈}}—connecting the {{ill|Zaō Mountains|ja|蔵王連峰|lt=Zaō Range}} and {{ill|Azuma Mountains|ja|吾妻連峰|lt=Azuma Range}}—close in from the northwest, marking the northern edge of the Fukushima Basin. North of this point the later {{ill|Ōshū Kaidō|ja|奥州街道}} becomes a rugged mountain path—described by [[Matsuo Bashō]] in ''[[Oku no Hosomichi]]'' as "Nagasaka" (Long Slope)—until it emerges into {{ill|Katta District|ja|刈田郡}} (present-day [[Shiroishi, Miyagi|Shiroishi]]).<ref name="pref">Fukushima Prefecture – "Corridor of Fukushima's History and Culture": "[http://www.pref.fukushima.jp/bunka/kairou/si/05kunimi.html Road Tracing History and Culture (Kunimi-machi)]."</ref> In this same area, {{ill|Fujiwara no Yasuhira|ja|藤原泰衡}} built the great Atsukashi-yama Defensive Wall to meet the Kamakura army sent by [[Minamoto no Yoritomo]] in the {{ill|Ōshū Campaign|ja|奥州合戦}} of {{ill|Bunji|ja|文治}} 5 ([[1189]]).<ref name="pref" /><ref name="town">Kunimi-machi: "[http://www.town.kunimi.fukushima.jp/groups/somu/shomu/profile/history.html The Town's History]."</ref>

== Tutelary shrines, etc. ==
* {{ill|Kashima Shrine (Fukushima)|ja|鹿嶋神社 (福島市)|lt=Kashima Shrine}} (an {{ill|Engishiki shrine|ja|式内社|lt=shikinaisha}}) – Four shrines exist within the former Shinobu District, but according to tradition, the one enshrined at 63 Takenouchi, Okajima, Fukushima City, was established when Kuma-no-Atai invited the spirit of [[Kashima Jingū]] from [[Hitachi Province]]. It was originally built on the summit of Mount Takamatsu, 4 km east-northeast of [[Mount Shinobu]], before being relocated to its present site at the western foot of the mountain. Another shrine is located at 38 Kita, Ōaza Fujita, Kunimi-machi, Date District.
* Tsukanome Tomb No. 1 (Hachimanzuka Kofun) – A [[keyhole-shaped kofun]] symbolizing the territory of the Yamato Kingship, thought to have been built in the mid-[[Kofun period]]. With a main axis length of 68 m, it is among the largest in the Nakadōri region of Fukushima Prefecture, and it is located in Kunimi-machi. Other tombs also constructed at Kunimi-machi include Ōdan Kofun, a [[:en:Round tumulus|round tomb]] 10 m in diameter built at the end of the Kofun period at Nishi-Ōeda, as well as tombs at Moriyama and Ōkido, making the area one of the prefecture's foremost kofun districts.<ref name="pref" /><ref name="town" />

== See also ==
* {{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}
** ({{ill|Iwase Province|ja|石背国}}: {{ill|Nakadōri|ja|中通り}}) '''[[Shirakawa Barrier|Shirakawa no Seki]]''': {{ill|Shirakawa no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|白河国造|lt=Shirakawa}} ({{ill|Shirakawa District|ja|白河郡}}) — {{ill|Iwase no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|石背国造|lt=Iwase}} ({{ill|Iwase District|ja|岩瀬郡}}) — {{ill|Asaka no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|阿尺国造|lt=Asaka}} ({{ill|Asaka District|ja|安積郡}}) — Shinobu (Shinobu District)
** ({{ill|Iwaki Province|ja|石城国}}: {{ill|Hamadōri|ja|浜通り}}) '''Kikuta no Seki''' ({{ill|Nakoso no Seki|ja|勿来関}}): {{ill|Michinoku no Kikuta no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|道奥菊多国造|lt=Kikuta}} ({{ill|Kikuta District|ja|菊多郡}}) — {{ill|Iwaki no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|石城国造|lt=Iwaki}} ({{ill|Iwaki District|ja|磐城郡}}) — {{ill|Shineha no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|染羽国造|lt=Shineha}} ({{ill|Shineha District|ja|標葉郡}}) — {{ill|Ukita no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|浮田国造|lt=Ukita}} ({{ill|Uda District, Fukushima|ja|宇多郡|lt=Uda District}}) — {{ill|Iku no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|伊久国造|lt=Iku}} ({{ill|Igu District|ja|伊具郡}}) — {{ill|Omoi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|思国造|lt=Omoi}} ({{ill|Shida District, Miyagi|ja|志田郡|lt=Shida District}})
**: ※ From south to north. Some medieval sources mention an Aizu agatanushi in {{ill|Aizu District|ja|会津郡}} (part of Iwase Province), but its existence is doubtful. Although there is no kuni no miyatsuko named after {{ill|Namekata District, Fukushima|ja|行方郡 (福島県)|lt=Namekata District}} of Iwaki Province, it is thought to have been included in the territory of the Ukita no Kuni no Miyatsuko.

== Notes ==
<references />

{{DEFAULTSORT:しのふのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:陸奥国]]
[[Category:福島県の歴史]]
[[Category:日本の歴史関連のスタブ項目]]
{{Japanese-history-stub}}
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:信夫国造]]
