{{日本の氏族
|家名 = Ōku no Kuni no Miyatsuko
|家紋 =
|家紋名称 =
|本姓 = {{ill|Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai clan|ja|海部氏|lt=Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai}}
|家祖 = {{ill|Sakinosukune-no-Mikoto|ja|佐紀足尼命}}
|種別 = [[Shinbetsu]]
|出身地 =
|根拠地 = Ōku Province<br />(later {{ill|Oku District, Okayama|ja|邑久郡|lt=Oku District}}, [[Bizen Province]])
|人物 = See [[#People|People]]
|支流 =
}}
{{nihongo|'''Ōku no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''|大伯国造|''ōku no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''ōku kokuzō''}} was a [[kuni no miyatsuko]] who ruled Ōku Province (bounded on the east by the border of [[Harima Province]], on the west by the [[Yoshii River, Okayama|Yoshii River]] (at its zenith, by the {{ill|Kojima Miyake|ja|児島屯倉}}), and on the north by the border of [[Mimasaka Province]]).<ref>''History of Ushimado-chō'' (Ushimado-chō, 2001).</ref><ref>{{Cite web|title=History of Oku-chō |url=https://www.city.setouchi.lg.jp/soshiki/7/3816.html |website=Setouchi City |access-date=2023-02-22 |language=ja}}</ref>

== Overview ==
=== Ancestry ===
* According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the {{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}, during the reign of [[Emperor Ōjin]], '''{{ill|Sakinosukune-no-Mikoto|ja|佐紀足尼命}}''', a 7th-generation descendant of [[Kamimusubi|Kamumusubi-no-Mikoto]], was appointed kuni no miyatsuko.<ref name="名前なし-20230316115115">Nihon Jiten, "Ōku no Kuni no Miyatsuko (Kibi) [http://www.nihonjiten.com/data/263283.html]".</ref> At the Misaki Shrine within [[Kibitsu Shrine]], '''Kushifuri''' — said to be the ancestor of the Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai clan — and his children '''Oki''' (female) and '''Mafuri''' (male) are enshrined.

=== Clan ===
The [[Amabe|Kibi-no-Amabe clan]] (''kibi no amabe-uji''; [[kabane]] of '''{{ill|Atai|ja|直}}'''). Among the Amabe-no-Atai who governed the Amabe ''be'', this branch was based in [[Kibi Province]] ([[Bizen Province]]). In the ''[[Kojiki]]'', it appears as the clan of origin of [[Kuro-hime]], consort of [[Emperor Nintoku]]. A Bizen Provincial Government document dated [[Chōwa]] 4 ([[1015]]), 4th month, 21st day (in ''Heian Ibun'', Vol. 10) mentions one Ama-no-Sukune Tomotada, assistant magistrate ({{ill|shōryō|ja|少領}}) of Oku District.<ref>Kokugakuin University Clan Database, "Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai [http://kojiki.kokugakuin.ac.jp/ujizoku/koshinotonaminoomi/]".</ref> Since the ''[[Nihon Shoki]]'' records that [[Ōku no Himemiko]], daughter of [[Emperor Tenmu]], was born at Ōku-no-umi in Kibi, the Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai — the kuni no miyatsuko family — is thought to have been her foster clan.<ref name="名前なし-20230316115115"/>

== People ==
* '''Kuro-hime''' (''kuro-hime'')
*: Because of her beauty, she was taken into service by [[Emperor Nintoku]], but she returned home to Kibi out of fear of the jealousy of the Empress Consort, [[Iwanohime]].
* '''{{ill|Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai Akao|ja|吉備海部赤尾|lt=Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai Akao}}''' (''kibi no amabe no atai akao'')
*: In [[Emperor Yūryaku]] 7 (possibly [[463]]), he was ordered by Yūryaku to subjugate [[Silla]] and to bring back from [[Baekje]] technicians more skilled than [[Kanin Chiri]].
* '''{{ill|Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai Naniwa|ja|吉備海部難波|lt=Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai Naniwa}}''' (''kibi no amabe no atai naniwa'')
*: In the 5th month of [[Emperor Bidatsu]] 2 ([[573]]), he was made escort for envoys returning to [[Goguryeo]], but he abandoned his duty and made a false report, for which he was punished in the 7th month of the following year.<ref>''Nihon Shoki'', entries for Emperor Bidatsu, Year 2, 5th month, 3rd day and 7th month, 1st day; Year 3, 7th month, 20th day.</ref>
* '''{{ill|Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai Hashima|ja|吉備海部羽嶋|lt=Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai Hashima}}''' (''kibi no amabe no atai hashima'')
*: In Bidatsu 12 ([[583]]) he was sent twice to [[Baekje]] to escort [[Nichira]] back.<ref>''Nihon Shoki'', entries for Emperor Bidatsu, Year 12, 7th month, 1st day; 10th month; and the year's summary entry.</ref>

== Descendants ==
* According to the ''{{ill|Ruijū Sandai Kyaku|ja|類聚三代格}}'', on the 24th day of the 6th month of [[Tenpyō]] 3 ([[731]]), the '''Amabe''' of Bizen Province served in attendance upon [[Emperor Shōmu]].
* According to wooden tablets ({{ill|mokkan|ja|木簡}}) excavated from the Heijō Palace site, though the year is unknown, an individual named '''Amabe no Mi◻︎''' is recorded as the head of a household in Ishikami-gō, {{ill|Oku District, Okayama|ja|邑久郡|lt=Oku District}}, [[Bizen Province]].
* According to a Bizen Provincial Government document dated [[Chōwa]] 4 ([[1015]]), 4th month, 21st day (an annotation on the reverse of the Maeda family copy of ''Nenchū Gyōji Hishō''), the assistant magistrate (''shōryō'') Senior Fifth Rank, Upper Grade, '''Ama-no-Sukune Tomotada''' requested that Acting Senior Magistrate ({{ill|dairyō|ja|大領|lt=dairyō}}) Junior Eighth Rank, Upper Grade, '''Ama-no-Sukune Tsunesada''' be installed as assistant magistrate, owing to his own old age.

== Tombs ==
The [[Kuroshima Kofun]], [[Ushimado Tenjinyama Kofun]], {{ill|Kahoyama Kofun|ja|鹿歩山古墳|lt=Kahoyama Kofun}}, and {{ill|Hakayama Kofun|ja|波歌山古墳|lt=Hakayama Kofun}} in [[Ushimado, Okayama|Ushimado-chō]] are considered the [[kofun]] of the Kibi-no-Amabe-no-Atai clan.<ref>{{Cite book|author=[[Katō Kenkichi]]|date=2015|title=Nihon Kodai no Ōken to Chihō|series=|publisher=[[Daiwa Shobō]]}}</ref>

== Notes ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
{{Reflist}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:おおくのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:阿波国の氏族]]
[[Category:丹後国の氏族]]
[[Category:近畿地方の氏族]]
[[Category:古代日本の人物]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:大伯国造]]
