'''Niihari no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''niihari no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''niihari kokuzō'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled western {{ill|Hitachi Province|ja|常陸国}}.

== Overview ==
=== Ancestry ===
*According to the ''{{ill|Hitachi-no-Kuni Fudoki|ja|常陸国風土記}}'', during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Sujin|ja|崇神天皇|lt=Emperor Sujin|lt_ja=崇神朝}}, '''{{ill|Hinarasu-no-Mikoto|ja|比奈良珠命}}''', the ancestor of the Niihari no Kuni no Miyatsuko, reached this area in an eastern expedition.
*According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'', during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Seimu|ja|成務天皇|lt=Emperor Seimu|lt_ja=成務朝}}, Hinarabu-no-Mikoto, son of {{ill|Mitsurogi-no-Mikoto|ja|美都呂岐命}}, was appointed Niihari no Kuni no Miyatsuko.

=== Clan ===
'''{{ill|Niihari clan|ja|新治氏}}''' (''niihari-uji''; {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} of {{ill|Atai (kabane)|ja|直 (姓)|lt=Atai|lt_ja=直}}), whose names Niihari-no-Atai-Kogimi<ref>''{{ill|Shoku Nihongi|ja|続日本紀}}'', Jingo-keiun 1, 3rd month.</ref> and Niihari-no-Atai-Ōnao<ref>''Shoku Nihongi'', Enryaku 9, 12th month.</ref> appear in the ''Shoku Nihongi''. They are a clan of the {{ill|Tenson-zoku|ja|天孫族}} with {{ill|Amaterasu|ja|天照大御神}} as distant ancestor, of the same clan as the {{ill|Musashi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|武蔵国造}}, {{ill|Sagamu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|相武国造}}, {{ill|Kami-tsu-Unakami no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|上海上国造}}, {{ill|Shimotsu-Unakami no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|下海上国造}}, {{ill|Chiba no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|千葉国造}}, {{ill|Awa no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|阿波国造}}, {{ill|Ijimi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|伊甚国造}}, {{ill|Izumo no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|出雲国造}}, and {{ill|Suga no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|素賀国造}}.

== Base ==
=== Territory ===
The domain of the kuni no miyatsuko was the region then called '''{{ill|Niihari Province|ja|新治国}}''', later '''{{ill|Niihari District (Hitachi)|ja|新治郡 (常陸国)|lt=Niihari District|lt_ja=新治郡}}''' of {{ill|Hitachi Province|ja|常陸国}} under the {{ill|ritsuryō province|ja|律令国}} system. It is considered to correspond to present-day {{ill|Sakuragawa, Ibaraki|ja|桜川市|lt=Sakuragawa City|lt_ja=桜川市}} and {{ill|Chikusei, Ibaraki|ja|筑西市|lt=Chikusei City|lt_ja=筑西市}} in Ibaraki Prefecture.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
'''{{ill|Inada Shrine|ja|稲田神社}}''', the {{ill|Shikinai-sha|ja|式内社}} of {{ill|Niihari District|ja|新治郡}} and a {{ill|Myōjin Taisha|ja|名神大社}}. Considered the tutelary shrine of the Niihari no Kuni no Miyatsuko<ref>''Nihon no Kamigami'', Inada Shrine section.</ref>.

=== Tombs ===
*'''{{ill|Ashimayama Kofun|ja|葦間山古墳}}'''
*:A {{ill|keyhole-shaped kofun|ja|前方後円墳}} in {{ill|Chikusei, Ibaraki|ja|筑西市|lt=Chikusei City|lt_ja=筑西市}}, estimated at 141 meters in length, with a tradition in one theory that it is the tomb of the first kuni no miyatsuko, Hinarasu-no-Mikoto<ref>''Ibaraki-ken no Chimei'', Tokumochi Kofun entry.</ref>.
*'''{{ill|Chōhenjiyama Kofun|ja|長辺寺山古墳}}'''
*:A keyhole-shaped kofun 120 meters long in {{ill|Sakuragawa, Ibaraki|ja|桜川市|lt=Sakuragawa City|lt_ja=桜川市}}.

== Descendants ==
*{{ill|Niihari-no-Kogimi|ja|新治子公}} (''niihari no kogimi'')
*:{{ill|Nara period|ja|奈良時代}} {{ill|gōzoku|ja|豪族}} and Dairyō of {{ill|Niihari District|ja|新治郡}}. Junior Fifth Rank, Lower, outer.

== Footnotes ==
=== Notes ===
{{notelist}}
=== Citations ===
{{Reflist}}

== See also ==
*{{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}
*{{ill|Niihari District Office Ruins|ja|新治郡衙跡}}

== References ==
*''Kokushi Daijiten'' (Yoshikawa Kōbunkan)
*Sakamoto Tarō, Hirano Kunio, ''Nihon Kodai Shizoku Jinmei Jiten'' (Yoshikawa Kōbunkan)
*''Nihon-shi Kōjiten'' (Yamakawa Shuppansha)
*''Shintō Daijiten'' (Rinsen Shoten)

{{DEFAULTSORT:にいはりのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:常陸国]]
[[Category:茨城県の歴史]]
{{Japanese-history-stub}}
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:新治国造]]
