{{日本の氏族
|家名=Motosu no Kuni no Miyatsuko
<!-- |家紋= 家紋の画像 -->
|家紋名称=
|本姓=Mino clan (Atai)
|家祖={{ill|Yatsuuri-Iribiko-no-Ōkimi|ja|八瓜入日子王|lt=Kamu-Ōne-no-Ōkimi|lt_ja=神大根王}}<br/>(prince of {{ill|Hikoimasu-no-Ōkimi|ja|彦坐王}})
|種別={{ill|Kōbetsu|ja|皇別}}
|出身地={{ill|Yamato Province|ja|大和国}}
|根拠地={{ill|Motosu District|ja|本巣郡}}, {{ill|Mino Province|ja|美濃国}}
|人物=
|支流=Nagahatabe-no-Muraji
}}
'''Motosu no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''motosu no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''motosu kokuzō'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled [[#Base|Motosu Province]]. Considered the same kuni no miyatsuko as the '''Mino no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' and '''{{ill|Mino-no-Michinokuchi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|三野前国造}}'''<ref>"Kodai-Chūsei, Chapter 1, Kamo District in the Pre-Taika Era, Section 3, Kuni no Miyatsuko and Agata-nushi," ''Minokamo Shishi Tsūshi-hen'', {{ill|Minokamo, Gifu|ja|美濃加茂市|lt=Minokamo City|lt_ja=美濃加茂市}}, 1980, p. 202.</ref><ref>"Chapter 6, Pre-Taika Era, Section 2, Kuni no Miyatsuko and Agata-nushi," ''Kakamigahara Shishi Tsūshi-hen Shizen-Genshi-Kodai-Chūsei'', Kakamigahara City Board of Education, 1986, pp. 181-184.</ref><ref name="kamo">{{ill|Hōga Toshio|ja|宝賀寿男}}, "Branching and Activities of the Mino-no-Michinokuchi no Kuni no Miyatsuko and Others," ''Kodai Shizoku no Kenkyū 18: Kamo-shi, Hattori-shi — Descendants of Sukunahiko-no-Kami'', Aogaki Shuppan, 2021, pp. 81, 82.</ref>.

== Overview ==
=== Ancestry ===
*According to the Emperor Kaika section of the ''{{ill|Kojiki|ja|古事記}}'', the ancestor is '''{{ill|Kamu-Ōne-no-Ōkimi|ja|神大根王}}''' (Yatsuuri-Iribiko-no-Ōkimi), son of {{ill|Hikoimasu-no-Ōkimi|ja|彦坐王}}.
*In the ''Kojiki'' {{ill|Emperor Keikō|ja|景行天皇}} section, Ōne-no-Ōkimi is the ancestor of the Mino no Kuni no Miyatsuko; in the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'' Emperor Keikō section, Kami-hone is made the Mino no Kuni no Miyatsuko; and in the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'', Yatsuuri-no-Mikoto is transmitted as the {{ill|Mino-no-Michinokuchi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|三野前国造}}, indicating that the Motosu no Kuni no Miyatsuko, Mino no Kuni no Miyatsuko, and Mino-no-Michinokuchi no Kuni no Miyatsuko were regarded as the same kuni no miyatsuko.


=== Clan ===
'''{{ill|Mino clan|ja|美濃氏}}''' (''mino-uji''; {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} of {{ill|Atai (kabane)|ja|直 (姓)|lt=Atai|lt_ja=直}}), whose ancestor is {{ill|Hikoimasu-no-Ōkimi|ja|彦坐王}}, of the same lineage as the {{ill|Nagahatabe clan|ja|長幡部氏|lt=Nagahatabe-no-Muraji|lt_ja=長幡部連}}, etc.

== Base ==
Mino-gō of '''{{ill|Motosu District|ja|本巣郡}}''' in {{ill|Mino Province|ja|美濃国}}. However, construction of large kofun in Motosu District was limited to the {{ill|Sōkei Ōtsuka Kofun|ja|宗慶大塚古墳}} and little else, and there is a theory that they soon shifted their base to {{ill|Fuwa District|ja|不破郡}} and {{ill|Anpachi District|ja|安八郡}}<ref name="kamo2">Hōga Toshio, "Branching and Activities of the Mino-no-Michinokuchi no Kuni no Miyatsuko and Others," ''Kodai Shizoku no Kenkyū 18: Kamo-shi, Hattori-shi — Descendants of Sukunahiko-no-Kami'', Aogaki Shuppan, 2021, p. 83.</ref>.

=== Territory ===
Initially present-day {{ill|Motosu, Gifu|ja|本巣市|lt=Motosu City|lt_ja=本巣市}}, {{ill|Mizuho, Gifu|ja|瑞穂市|lt=Mizuho City|lt_ja=瑞穂市}}, and {{ill|Kitagata, Gifu|ja|北方町|lt=Kitagata Town|lt_ja=北方町}}, {{ill|Gifu Prefecture|ja|岐阜県}}. There is a theory that {{ill|Kata District|ja|方県郡}} is presumed to be the Mino-agata, and that they later gained the territory of the Mino-agata-nushi east of Motosu District and became Mino no Kuni no Miyatsuko ({{ill|Mino-no-Michinokuchi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|三野前国造}})<ref>"Chapter 6, Pre-Taika Era, Section 2, Kuni no Miyatsuko and Agata-nushi," ''Kakamigahara Shishi Tsūshi-hen Shizen-Genshi-Kodai-Chūsei'', Kakamigahara City Board of Education, 1986, pp. 194, 195.</ref>, and another theory that, prior to being appointed {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Seimu|ja|成務天皇|lt=Emperor Seimu|lt_ja=成務朝}}, they were Mino-agata-nushi, and the territory of the Mino-no-Michinokuchi no Kuni no Miyatsuko was the area including Motosu District, Fuwa District, Anpachi District, {{ill|Mushiroda District|ja|席田郡 (岐阜県)|lt=Mushiroda District|lt_ja=席田郡}}, Kata District, and {{ill|Yamagata District, Gifu|ja|山県郡|lt=Yamagata District|lt_ja=山県郡}}<ref>Hōga Toshio, "Branching and Activities of the Mino-no-Michinokuchi no Kuni no Miyatsuko and Others," ''Kodai Shizoku no Kenkyū 18: Kamo-shi, Hattori-shi — Descendants of Sukunahiko-no-Kami'', Aogaki Shuppan, 2021, pp. 86-89.</ref>.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
Perhaps the {{ill|ichinomiya|ja|一宮}} of {{ill|Mino Province|ja|美濃国}}, '''{{ill|Nangū Taisha|ja|南宮大社}}'''<ref name="kamo2"/>.

=== Related Shrines ===
*{{ill|Kōsaka Shrine (Motosu)|ja|高坂神社 (本巣市)|lt=Kōsaka Shrine|lt_ja=高坂神社}} (''kōsaka-jinja'')
*:A {{ill|shrine|ja|神社}} enshrined at Kinbara, {{ill|Motosu, Gifu|ja|本巣市|lt=Motosu City|lt_ja=本巣市}}, {{ill|Gifu Prefecture|ja|岐阜県}}, which venerates Kamu-Ōne-no-Ōkimi, ancestor of the kuni no miyatsuko, and others. It is said to have been invited by the sisters Ane-hime and Oto-hime, daughters of Kamu-Ōne-no-Ōkimi.
*{{ill|Kamo Shrine (Motosu District, Kitagata)|ja|賀茂神社 (本巣郡北方町)|lt=Kamo Shrine|lt_ja=賀茂神社}} (''kamo-jinja'')
*:A shrine enshrined at Kamo, {{ill|Kitagata, Gifu|ja|北方町|lt=Kitagata Town|lt_ja=北方町}}, {{ill|Motosu District|ja|本巣郡}}, Gifu Prefecture, which enshrines {{ill|Wake-Ikazuchi-no-Mikoto|ja|別雷命}} and {{ill|Kamo-Taketsunumi-no-Mikoto|ja|賀茂建角身命|lt=Kamo-Mioya-no-Kami|lt_ja=賀茂御祖神}}.
*{{ill|Karasu Shrine (Motosu)|ja|香良洲神社 (本巣市)|lt=Karasu Shrine|lt_ja=香良洲神社}} (''karasu-jinja'')
*:A shrine enshrined at Hayano, Motosu City, Gifu Prefecture, which, from the shrine name, may originally have enshrined {{ill|Yatagarasu|ja|八咫烏}}<ref name="kamo"/>.

=== Tombs ===
*'''{{ill|Sōkei Ōtsuka Kofun|ja|宗慶大塚古墳}}'''
*:A {{ill|keyhole-shaped kofun|ja|前方後円墳}} with a mound length of 63 meters in Sōkei, Motosu City, Gifu Prefecture, constructed in the early {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代}} ({{ill|4th century|ja|4世紀}}). As for the occupant, there is a theory that it is Kamu-Ōne-no-Ōkimi or one of his descendants, and from old times it has also been called Ōzuka (Ō-tomb).

== Footnotes ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
{{Reflist}}

== References ==
{{No footnotes|section=1|date=2019年9月11日 (水) 15:08 (UTC)}}
{{ページ番号|section=1|date=2019年9月11日 (水) 15:08 (UTC)}}
* ''Kokushi Daijiten'' ({{ill|Yoshikawa Kōbunkan|ja|吉川弘文館}})
* {{ill|Sakamoto Tarō (historian)|ja|坂本太郎 (歴史学者)|lt=Sakamoto Tarō|lt_ja=坂本太郎}} and {{ill|Hirano Kunio|ja|平野邦雄}}, supervising eds., ''Nihon Kodai Shizoku Jinmei Jiten'' (Yoshikawa Kōbunkan, 1990)
* ''Nihon Kodai Jinmei Jiten'' (Yoshikawa Kōbunkan)
* Nihon-shi Kōjiten Editorial Committee, ''Nihon-shi Kōjiten'' ({{ill|Yamakawa Shuppansha|ja|山川出版社}}, 1997)
* ''Shintō Daijiten'' ({{ill|Rinsen Shoten|ja|臨川書店}})
* ''Nihon-shi Sōran'' ({{ill|Shinjinbutsu Ōraisha|ja|新人物往来社}})

== See also ==
* {{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:もとすのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:美濃国]]
[[Category:岐阜県の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:本巣国造]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
