{{出典の明記|date=2012年5月}}
{{要出典範囲|date=2019年9月|'''Nuta no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''nuta no kuni no miyatsuko'') is said to be a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who, in antiquity, ruled the region around the {{ill|Nuta River|ja|沼田川}} in present-day {{ill|Mihara, Hiroshima|ja|三原市|lt=Mihara City|lt_ja=三原市}}, {{ill|Hiroshima Prefecture|ja|広島県}}}}.

== Overview ==
It is a kuni no miyatsuko self-styled by the Tsukushi family, {{ill|shake|ja|社家}} of {{ill|Nuta Shrine|ja|沼田神社}}, and whose existence is asserted by the ''Mihara Shishi''.
=== Ancestry ===
*According to the shake's tradition, their family ancestor is {{ill|Akihayatama-no-Mikoto|ja|飽速玉命}}, ancestor of the {{ill|Aki no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|阿岐国造}} and others.

=== Clan ===
'''{{ill|Tsukushi clan (Aki Province)|ja|筑紫氏 (安芸国)|lt=Tsukushi clan|lt_ja=筑紫氏}}''' (''tsukushi-uji''; {{ill|kabane|ja|姓|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} unknown).

The domain gradually came under the {{ill|ritsuryō system|ja|律令制}}, and during the {{ill|medieval period|ja|中世}}, the area became the {{ill|shōen|ja|荘園 (日本)|lt=shōen|lt_ja=荘園}} of the {{ill|Saionji family|ja|西園寺家}} known as {{ill|Nuta no Shō|ja|沼田荘}} (''nuta no shō''). The shō's {{ill|geshi|ja|下司}} was the local {{ill|gōzoku|ja|豪族}} Nuta clan ({{ill|Fujiwara no Tomozane|ja|藤原倫実}}?), originating in the ''{{ill|Gakuonji Engi Emaki|ja|楽音寺縁起絵巻}}''. Later, the Saionji family lost power, and in the {{ill|Sengoku period|ja|戦国時代 (日本)|lt=Sengoku period|lt_ja=戦国時代}}, {{ill|Doi Sanehira|ja|土肥実平}} became {{ill|jitō|ja|地頭職|lt=jitō|lt_ja=地頭職}}, after which the area was placed under the rule of the {{ill|Kobayakawa clan|ja|小早川氏}}. Throughout this, the Tsukushi family continued as the {{ill|shake|ja|社家}} of {{ill|Nuta Shrine (Mihara)|ja|沼田神社 (三原市)|lt=Nuta Shrine|lt_ja=沼田神社}} (formerly Nuta-gū), located in Honichi, {{ill|Nuta-higashi-chō|ja|沼田東町}}, {{ill|Mihara, Hiroshima|ja|三原市|lt=Mihara City|lt_ja=三原市}}, continuing until after the {{ill|post-war period|ja|戦後|lt=post-war|lt_ja=戦後}}. According to a Meiji 12 (1879) filed record, they also served as priests of the {{ill|Ogatashima Shrine|ja|小方島神社}} in Katashima, Nuta-higashi-chō; {{ill|Shippō Itsukushima Shrine|ja|嚴島神社 (三原市沼田東町七宝)|lt=Shippō Itsukushima Shrine|lt_ja=七宝厳島神社}} in Shippō, Nuta-higashi-chō; {{ill|Kameyama Shrine|ja|亀山神社}}; and all other shrines in Nuta-higashi. According to old records kept by the Tsukushi family, "{{ill|Kan'ei|ja|寛永}} 2 ([[1625]]), written by {{ill|Daigūji|ja|大宮司}} kokuzō Kunai-dayū Fujiwara Naomasa" is noted. The Tsukushi family grave sites remain at Kameyama and other places in Shippō, Nuta-higashi-chō. The last head was the {{ill|mythologist|ja|神話学者}} {{ill|Tsukushi Nobuzane|ja|筑紫申真}}<ref>Tsukushi Nobuzane (''tsukushi nobuzane''; [[1920]]–[[1973]]). His works include ''Amaterasu no Tanjō'' ({{ill|Kodansha|ja|講談社}}, later {{ill|Kodansha Gakujutsu Bunko|ja|講談社学術文庫}}, [[2002]] May, ISBN 4061595458 ISBN 978-4061595453).</ref>. The reading of Tsukushi is "tsukushi" and is unrelated to the Tsukushi (''chikushi'') clan originating in Kyushu.

== Base ==


=== Territory ===
The domain of the kuni no miyatsuko is considered to correspond to the region then called '''Nuta Province''', around the present-day {{ill|Nuta River|ja|沼田川}}.

However, no records of a "Nuta no Kuni no Miyatsuko" appear in historical sources, beginning with the "Kokuzō Hongi" (Volume 10 of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'') in which kuni no miyatsuko are enumerated. In the "Kokuzō Hongi," for the entire Aki region (later {{ill|Aki Province|ja|安芸国}}) including the Nuta River, only the {{ill|Aki no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|阿岐国造}} is listed. Regarding this, the ''Mihara Shishi'', based on the theory that the "Kokuzō Hongi" does not cover all kuni no miyatsuko nationwide, points out the possibility that a kuni no miyatsuko existed in the Nuta River basin<ref>''Mihara Shishi Vol. 1, General History 1'', pp. 102-103.</ref>. In fact, there may be cases not comprehensively covered, such as the {{ill|Motosu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|本巣国造}} and {{ill|Mugetsu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|牟義都国造}} recorded only in the ''{{ill|Kojiki|ja|古事記}}'', and the {{ill|Suwa no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|洲羽国造}}{{efn|However, some manuscripts of the "Kokuzō Hongi" record it as Suha no Kuni no Miyatsuko.}} and {{ill|Kiso no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|木蘇国造}} recorded only in the ''Suwa-shi Keizu''.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
{{ill|Nuta Shrine (Mihara)|ja|沼田神社 (三原市)|lt=Nuta Shrine|lt_ja=沼田神社}} enshrines {{ill|Susanoo|ja|須佐之男神|lt=Susanoo-no-Kami|lt_ja=須佐之男神}} and {{ill|Kushinadahime|ja|櫛名田比売|lt=Kushinadahime-no-Kami|lt_ja=櫛名田比売神}}.

== Footnotes ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
{{Reflist}}
{{Notelist}}

==See also==
*{{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}}
*{{ill|Itsukushima Kannushi Family|ja|厳島神主家}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:ぬたのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:三原市の歴史]]
[[Category:安芸国]]
{{Japanese-history-stub}}
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:沼田国造]]
