{{nihongo|'''Awaji no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''|淡道国造|''awaji no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''awaji kokuzō''}} was a [[kuni no miyatsuko]] who ruled [[Awaji Province]] under the later {{ill|ritsuryō provinces|ja|令制国}}, corresponding to [[Awaji Island]] in modern [[Hyōgo Prefecture]].

According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the {{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}, during the reign of [[Emperor Nintoku]], Yaguchi-no-Sukune, a 9th-generation descendant of Kamimusubi-no-Mikoto, was appointed kuni no miyatsuko. However, Yaguchi-no-Sukune is a figure of [[legend]], and in fact the Ōshi-no-Atai clan, which appears as the guide in the Yukamono clause of the [[Daijōsai|Jingi Senso Daijōsai]] in the {{ill|Engishiki|ja|延喜式}}, is thought to have held the position of kuni no miyatsuko, though no notable historical activity is recorded for them.

Awaji Island is said in the {{ill|[[Kojiki]] creation myth|ja|国産み|lt=Kuniumi}} [[mythology]] of the [[Age of the Gods]] to have been the first [[island]] born. As for the origin of the name, the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'' states that [[Izanagi|Izanagi-no-Mikoto]] was dissatisfied with the island's birth, treated it as an "afterbirth" and named it "Awaji-no-shima" (Province of the Afterbirth); the ''{{ill|Shaku Nihongi|ja|釈日本紀}}'' interprets that because the island was unexpectedly small, it was treated as an afterbirth rather than counted among the children, and in deep shame was called "Aji" (Our Shame). In his ''{{ill|Kojiki-den|ja|古事記伝}}'', Motoori Norinaga explained it as "the island in the sea on the way to [[Awa Province (Shikoku)|Awa]]", though this ignores both the kuniumi order and the topography of the island. Awaji has also had close ties with the [[Yamato Kingship]] from early times, and according to tradition it was a {{ill|Miketsukuni|ja|御食国}}, a province that offered foodstuffs to the court.

== References ==
* Katō Kenkichi et al. (eds.), ''Nihon Kodaishi Chimei Jiten'' [Dictionary of Japanese Ancient History Place Names], Yuzankaku, 2007, ISBN 978-4-639-01995-4, p. 728.

{{Japanese-history-stub}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:あわしのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:淡路国]]
[[Category:兵庫県の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:淡道国造]]
