'''Mugetsu no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''mugetsu no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''mugetsu kokuzō'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled [[#Territory|Mugetsu Province]] (north-central {{ill|Mino Province|ja|美濃国}}).

== Overview ==
=== Writing ===
In the ''{{ill|Jōgūki|ja|上宮記}}'' cited by the ''{{ill|Shaku Nihongi|ja|釈日本紀}}'', it appears as '''Mugetsu no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''. It is also written as '''Mugetsu-no-Kimi''' or '''Mugetsu-no-Kimi'''.

=== Ancestry ===
* According to the ''{{ill|Kojiki|ja|古事記}}'', '''{{ill|Oshi-kuro-no-Otohiko-no-Ōkimi|ja|押黒弟日子王}}''', born when {{ill|Ōusu-no-Mikoto|ja|大碓命}}, son of {{ill|Emperor Keikō|ja|景行天皇}}, had an illicit affair with {{ill|Otohime|ja|弟媛|lt=Otohime|lt_ja=弟比売}}, daughter of {{ill|Kamu-Ōne-no-Mikoto|ja|大根王|lt=Kamu-Ōne-no-Mikoto|lt_ja=神大根王}}, was the ancestor. The grandfather of {{ill|Emperor Keitai|ja|継体天皇}} is also said to have married a daughter of this kuni no miyatsuko.

=== Clan ===
'''{{ill|Muge clan|ja|身毛氏}}''' (''mugetsu-uji''; {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} of {{ill|Kimi (kabane)|ja|君 (カバネ)|lt=Kimi|lt_ja=君}}). Also written Muge, Mugetsu, Mugetsu, Mugetsu, Mugi, Mugi, Mugetsu, etc. Some later received the kabane of {{ill|Sukune|ja|宿禰}}.

Through the {{ill|Hanyūri-koseki|ja|半布里戸籍}}, marital ties with the {{ill|Kamo Agatanushi (Mino)|ja|鴨県主 (美濃)|lt=Kamo Agatanushi|lt_ja=鴨県主}} are confirmed. Inheriting the Mizutori (water-drawing) function held by that clan, they accompanied {{ill|Empress Genshō|ja|元正天皇}}'s procession to the sweet-water spring in Mino Province, and by offering that sweet-water spring to the capital, they came to serve as the Mondo (water stewards)<ref>{{Cite book |和書|last= |first= |author= Seki City Board of Education|authorlink= |coauthors= |year= 1996|title= Shinshū Seki Shishi Tsūshi-hen: Shizen, Genshi, Kodai, Chūsei|publisher= {{ill|Seki, Gifu|ja|関市|lt=Seki City|lt_ja=関市}}|location= |pages= 542 - 544|chapter= Mugetsu-shi to Naitei|id= |isbn= }}</ref>.

== Base ==
The base of the kuni no miyatsuko is unclear, but based on the reference to the Mugetsu no Kuni no Miyatsuko '''Ijimura-no-Kimi''', there is a theory that the base was Ijira in Mino Province (present-day former Ijira Village of Yamagata City).

Excavations have revealed that there was a magnate's residence predating the construction of the Miroku-ji in the latter half of the 7th century, and a {{ill|Shōsō|ja|正倉}} accompanying the Nara-period {{ill|gunga|ja|郡衙}}. There is also a theory that identifies the "Ijimura" of the above-mentioned ''{{ill|Jōgūki|ja|上宮記}}'' (fragment) with Izushi-gō of Yamagata District in the ''{{ill|Wamyōshō|ja|和名抄}}'', and assigns it to {{ill|Ijira, Gifu|ja|伊自良村|lt=Ijira Village|lt_ja=伊自良村}} (present-day Yamagata City). It is also identified with Uchi-gō of Mugi District in the ''Wamyōshō''; the wide-area jōri-sei remains of Shimo-Uchi and the large-scale ancient village ruins of the Jūtake Site are seen there, making it a strong candidate for the base, but as it is on the opposite bank from the Miroku-ji Ruins on the right bank of the Nagara River, there is also a view that the grounds are weak<ref>{{Cite book |和書|last= |first= |author= Seki City Board of Education|authorlink= |coauthors= |year= 1996|title= Shinshū Seki Shishi Tsūshi-hen: Shizen, Genshi, Kodai, Chūsei|publisher= Seki City|location= |pages= 565 - 566|chapter= Uchi-gō|id= |isbn= }}</ref>.

=== Territory ===
The territory of the kuni no miyatsuko was the region then called '''Mugetsu Province''', corresponding to the later {{ill|Mugi District|ja|武儀郡}} of {{ill|Mino Province|ja|美濃国}}, equivalent to present-day {{ill|Seki, Gifu|ja|関市|lt=Seki City|lt_ja=関市}}, {{ill|Mino, Gifu|ja|美濃市|lt=Mino City|lt_ja=美濃市}}, and {{ill|Yamagata, Gifu|ja|山県市|lt=Yamagata City|lt_ja=山県市}} in {{ill|Gifu Prefecture|ja|岐阜県}}.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
Unknown.

=== Related Shrines ===
Although not listed in the ''{{ill|Engishiki Jinmyōchō|ja|延喜式神名帳}}'', the origins describe connections to the kuni no miyatsuko.
*'''Agata Shrine''' (''agata-jinja'')
*:A shrine enshrined in {{ill|Yamagata, Gifu|ja|山県市|lt=Yamagata City|lt_ja=山県市}}. Said to enshrine the kuni no miyatsuko Ijimura-no-Kimi as the Agata deity<ref>"[http://www.gifu-jinjacho.jp/syosai.php?shrno=1773&shrname=★県神社★ Agata Shrine]," ''Gifu Prefecture Shrine Agency''</ref>.
*'''{{ill|Mugi Hachimangū|ja|武芸八幡宮}}''' (''muge hachiman-gū'')
*:A shrine enshrined in {{ill|Seki, Gifu|ja|関市|lt=Seki City|lt_ja=関市}}. Said to have begun by enshrining {{ill|Ōusu-no-Mikoto|ja|大碓命}}, ancestor of the kuni no miyatsuko.

=== Tombs ===

== Clan Temple ==
{{ill|Miroku-ji (Seki)|ja|弥勒寺跡 (関市)|lt=Miroku-ji|lt_ja=弥勒寺}}.

== People ==
*'''{{ill|Ijimura-no-Kimi|ja|伊自牟良君}}''' (''ijimura no kimi'')
*:A {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代}} kuni no miyatsuko. Father of Kurubime-no-Mikoto (wife of {{ill|Ohi-no-Ōkimi|ja|乎非王}}).
*'''Muge-no-Kimi Masurao''' (''muge no kimi masurao'')
*:A figure from the era of {{ill|Emperor Yūryaku|ja|雄略天皇}}. He recalled Kibi-no-Yuge-be-no-Mitsusora from under {{ill|Kibi-no-Shitatsu-michi Maetsuya|ja|吉備下道前津屋}}.

== Descendants ==
*'''{{ill|Mugetsu Hiro|ja|身毛広}}''' (''mugetsu no hiro'')
*:A {{ill|Asuka period|ja|飛鳥時代}} {{ill|gōzoku|ja|豪族}}. Possibly a toneri of {{ill|Emperor Tenmu|ja|天武天皇|lt=Prince Ōama|lt_ja=大海人皇子}}. Active in the {{ill|Jinshin War|ja|壬申の乱}}.

== See also ==
*{{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}

== Footnotes ==
{{Reflist}}

== References ==
*''Kokushi Daijiten'' (Yoshikawa Kōbunkan)
*Sakamoto Tarō and Hirano Kunio, ''Nihon Kodai Shizoku Jinmei Jiten'' (Yoshikawa Kōbunkan)
*''Nihon-shi Kōjiten'' (Yamakawa Shuppansha)
*''Shintō Daijiten'' (Rinsen Shoten)

{{DEFAULTSORT:むけつのくにのみやつこ}}
{{Japanese-history-stub}}
[[Category:美濃国]]
[[Category:岐阜県の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:牟義都国造]]
