{{日本の氏族
|家名 = Suruga no Kuni no Miyatsuko
|家紋 = <!-- 家紋の画像 -->
|家紋名称 =
|本姓 = {{ill|Kanasashi clan|ja|金刺氏}} ({{ill|Mononobe clan|ja|物部氏}} lineage)
|家祖 = {{ill|Katakataishi-no-Mikoto|ja|片堅石命}}
|種別 = {{ill|Shinbetsu|ja|神別}} ({{ill|Tenson|ja|天孫}})
|出身地 = {{ill|Ōyamato Province|ja|大和国|lt=Ōyamato Province|lt_ja=大倭国}}
|根拠地 = Suruga Province (later {{ill|Suruga Province|ja|駿河国}})
|人物 = See [[#People|People]]
|支流 = (kabane in parentheses)<br />{{ill|Tōtsuōmi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|遠淡海国造}}<br />{{ill|Kunu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|久努国造}}<br />{{ill|Kuno clan|ja|久野氏|lt=Kunu clan|lt_ja=久努氏}} (Atai)<br />{{ill|Saya clan|ja|佐夜氏}} (Atai)<br />{{ill|Ochi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|小市国造}}<br />{{ill|Ochi clan|ja|越智氏|lt=Ochi clan|lt_ja=小市氏}} (Atai)<br />{{ill|Kazahaya no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|風速国造}}<br />{{ill|Kazahaya clan|ja|風速氏}} (Atai)
}}
'''Suruga no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''suruga no kuni miyatsuko'', ''suruga kokuzō'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled {{ill|Suruga Province (ancient)|ja|珠流河国|lt=Suruga Province|lt_ja=珠流河国}} (the eastern part of ritsuryō-era {{ill|Suruga Province|ja|駿河国}}). Also called Suruga no Kuni no Miyatsuko.

== Overview ==
=== Ancestry ===
* According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'', '''Katakataishi-no-Mikoto''', son of Ōniikawa-no-Mikoto, ancestor of the {{ill|Mononobe clan|ja|物部氏|lt=Mononobe-no-Muraji|lt_ja=物部連}}, was appointed kuni no miyatsuko during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Seimu|ja|成務天皇}}.
* According to the "Tenson Hongi" of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'', '''Mononobe-no-Katakataishi-no-Muraji-no-Kimi''', son of {{ill|Mononobe Tōchine|ja|物部十千根|lt=Tōchine-no-Ōmuraji|lt_ja=十市根大連}} and younger brother of {{ill|Mononobe Ikui|ja|物部胆咋|lt=Mononobe-no-Ikui|lt_ja=物部胆咋}}-no-Sukune, was the ancestor of the Suruga no Kuni no Miyatsuko. Tōchine and Ōniikawa-no-Mikoto were brothers.

Hōga Toshio asserts that, since there is actually no record of Tōchine being dispatched to the eastern provinces, he was in fact, as the "Kokuzō Hongi" describes, a son of Ōniikawa-no-Mikoto (also Takeniikawa-no-Mikoto or {{ill|Ōmefu-no-Mikoto|ja|大売布命}}), and was in a sibling relationship with Inkimi-no-Mikoto, ancestor of the {{ill|Tōtsuōmi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|遠淡海国造}}<ref>{{ill|Hōga Toshio|ja|宝賀寿男}}, "[http://wwr2.ucom.ne.jp/hetoyc15/hitori/takaosan1.htm The Preservation Problem of the Takaosan Kofun of Numazu]," ''Koju Kinobōma'', 2015</ref>.

=== Clan ===
'''{{ill|Kanasashi clan|ja|金刺氏}}''' (''kanazashi-uji''). The origin of the name is the {{ill|Shikishima-no-Kanasashi-no-Miya|ja|磯城嶋金刺宮}} ({{ill|Sakurai, Nara|ja|桜井市|lt=Sakurai City|lt_ja=桜井市}}, {{ill|Nara Prefecture|ja|奈良県}}), the imperial palace of {{ill|Emperor Kinmei|ja|欽明天皇}}, deriving from their providing {{ill|toneri|ja|舎人}} at that emperor's court. However, although sharing the Kanasashi-no-Toneri surname, they are a separate clan from the descendants of the {{ill|Shinanu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|科野国造}}.

== Base ==
The base of the kuni no miyatsuko is thought to have been centered on {{ill|Suruga District|ja|駿河郡}} of {{ill|Suruga Province|ja|駿河国}}.

=== Territory ===
The territory of the kuni no miyatsuko was the region then called '''Suruga Province''', corresponding to the later Suruga Province. It covers the area from around the present-day {{ill|Kanō River|ja|狩野川}} to the {{ill|Fuji River|ja|富士川}} in {{ill|Shizuoka Prefecture|ja|静岡県}}: {{ill|Fujinomiya, Shizuoka|ja|富士宮市|lt=Fujinomiya|lt_ja=富士宮市}}, {{ill|Fuji, Shizuoka|ja|富士市|lt=Fuji|lt_ja=富士市}}, {{ill|Numazu, Shizuoka|ja|沼津市|lt=Numazu|lt_ja=沼津市}}, {{ill|Gotemba, Shizuoka|ja|御殿場市|lt=Gotemba|lt_ja=御殿場市}}, {{ill|Susono, Shizuoka|ja|裾野市|lt=Susono|lt_ja=裾野市}}, {{ill|Shimizu, Sunto|ja|清水町 (静岡県)|lt=Shimizu|lt_ja=清水町}}, {{ill|Nagaizumi, Shizuoka|ja|長泉町|lt=Nagaizumi|lt_ja=長泉町}}, and {{ill|Oyama, Shizuoka|ja|小山町|lt=Oyama|lt_ja=小山町}}.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
Unknown. Candidates include '''{{ill|Fujisan Hongū Sengen Taisha|ja|富士山本宮浅間大社}}''', the {{ill|ichi-no-miya|ja|一宮}} of {{ill|Suruga Province|ja|駿河国}}, as well as {{ill|Fuchi-Rokusho Sengen Shrine|ja|富知六所浅間神社}} and {{ill|Momozawa Shrine|ja|桃澤神社}} (Nagaizumi Town or Numazu City).

=== Tombs ===
* '''{{ill|Takaosan Kofun|ja|高尾山古墳}}''' (''takaosan-kofun'')
*: A 62 m long {{ill|keyhole-rectangle kofun|ja|前方後方墳}} in {{ill|Numazu, Shizuoka|ja|沼津市|lt=Numazu City|lt_ja=沼津市}}, {{ill|Shizuoka Prefecture|ja|静岡県}}, dated to the mid-{{ill|3rd century|ja|3世紀}}. Based on its location and date of construction, it is considered to be the tomb of Ōniikawa-no-Mikoto, the kuni no miyatsuko's ancestor<ref>Hōga Toshio, "The Preservation Problem of the Takaosan Kofun of Numazu," ''Koju Kinobōma'', 2015</ref>.
* '''{{ill|Sengen Kofun|ja|浅間古墳}}''' (''sengen-kofun'')
*: A 100 m long keyhole-rectangle kofun in {{ill|Fuji, Shizuoka|ja|富士市|lt=Fuji City|lt_ja=富士市}}, Shizuoka Prefecture, dated to the late 4th century to early {{ill|5th century|ja|5世紀}}, though based on its relation to earlier and later kofun, it is also thought to be late 4th century.
* '''{{ill|Higashizaka Kofun|ja|東坂古墳}}''' (''higashizaka-kofun'')
*: A {{ill|keyhole-shaped kofun|ja|前方後円墳}} in Numazu City, Shizuoka Prefecture, dated to the early 5th century.
* '''{{ill|Shinmeizuka Kofun (Numazu)|ja|神明塚古墳 (沼津市)|lt=Shinmeizuka Kofun|lt_ja=神明塚古墳}}''' (''shinmeizuka-kofun'')
*: A 53 m long {{ill|keyhole-shaped kofun|ja|前方後円墳}} in Numazu City, Shizuoka Prefecture.
* '''{{ill|Kōshinzuka Kofun (Fuji)|ja|庚申塚古墳 (富士市)|lt=Kōshinzuka Kofun|lt_ja=庚申塚古墳}}''' (''kōshinzuka-kofun'')
*: A 40 m long {{ill|sōhōchūhō-fun|ja|双方中方墳}} in Fuji City, Shizuoka Prefecture, dated to late 5th century to early {{ill|6th century|ja|6世紀}}.
* '''{{ill|Yamanokami Kofun (Fuji)|ja|山ノ神古墳 (富士市)|lt=Yamanokami Kofun|lt_ja=山ノ神古墳}}''' (''yamanokami-kofun'')
*: A 41 m long keyhole-shaped kofun in Fuji City, Shizuoka Prefecture, dated to the first half of the 6th century.
* '''{{ill|Nagatsuka Kofun (Numazu)|ja|長塚古墳 (沼津市)|lt=Nagatsuka Kofun|lt_ja=長塚古墳}}''' (''nagatsuka-kofun'')
*: A 54 m long keyhole-shaped kofun in Numazu City, Shizuoka Prefecture, dated to the first half of the 6th century.
* '''{{ill|Nenokami Kofun (Numazu)|ja|子ノ神古墳 (沼津市)|lt=Nenokami Kofun|lt_ja=子ノ神古墳}}''' (''nenokami-kofun'')
*: A 46 m long keyhole-shaped kofun in Numazu City, Shizuoka Prefecture.

== Descendants ==
* {{ill|Kanasashi-no-Toneri-no-Maji|ja|金刺舎人麻自}} (''kanazashi toneri no maji'')
*: A {{ill|Nara period|ja|奈良時代}} {{ill|gōzoku|ja|豪族}}. Jū-rokui-ge.

== Footnotes ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
{{Reflist}}

== See also ==
* {{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}

== References ==
* ''Kokushi Daijiten'' ({{ill|Yoshikawa Kōbunkan|ja|吉川弘文館}})
* Sakamoto Tarō and Hirano Kunio, ''Nihon Kodai Shizoku Jinmei Jiten'' (Yoshikawa Kōbunkan)
* ''Nihon Kodai Jinmei Jiten'' (Yoshikawa Kōbunkan)
* ''Nihon-shi Kōjiten'' ({{ill|Yamakawa Shuppansha|ja|山川出版社}})
* ''Shintō Daijiten'' (Rinsen Shoten)
* ''Nihon-shi Sōran'' ({{ill|Shinjinbutsu Ōraisha|ja|新人物往来社}})

{{DEFAULTSORT:するかのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:日本の歴史関連のスタブ項目]]
[[Category:駿河国]]
[[Category:駿河国の氏族]]
[[Category:金刺氏]]
[[Category:物部氏|-するかのくにのみやつこ]]
[[Category:静岡県の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:珠流河国造]]
