{{日本の氏族
|家名 = Kai no Kuni no Miyatsuko
|家紋 = <!-- 家紋の画像 -->
|家紋名称 =
|本姓 = {{ill|Kai clan|ja|甲斐氏}}
|家祖 = {{ill|Shiomi-no-Sukune|ja|塩海宿禰}}
|種別 = {{ill|Shinbetsu|ja|神別}} ({{ill|Tenjin|ja|天津神|lt=Tenjin|lt_ja=天神}}) or {{ill|Kōbetsu|ja|皇別}}
|出身地 = {{ill|Ōyamato Province|ja|大和国|lt=Ōyamato Province|lt_ja=大倭国}}
|根拠地 = {{ill|Kai Province|ja|甲斐国}}
|人物 = See [[#People|People]]
|支流 = {{ill|Mibu clan|ja|壬生氏}}, {{ill|Saegusa clan|ja|三枝氏}} ({{ill|bushi|ja|武家}})<ref>''Saegusa-be-shi Shoki Kōyō''</ref>, ({{ill|Ho no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|穂国造}}, {{ill|Hamana Agatanushi|ja|浜名県主}})
}}
'''Kai no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''kai no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''kai kokuzō'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled {{ill|Kai Province|ja|甲斐国}}.
__TOC__{{-}}

== Overview ==
=== Writing ===
In the ''{{ill|Kojiki|ja|古事記}}'', the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'', and the ''Shokeizu''<ref>{{ill|Suzuki Manen|ja|鈴木真年}}, "Tōgoku Shokokuzō," ''Shokeizu'' Vol. 1.</ref><ref name="nakata">{{ill|Nakata Kenshin|ja|中田憲信}}, "Kai no Kuni no Miyatsuko," ''Shokeizu'' Vol. 7.</ref>, it appears as '''Kai no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''.

=== Ancestry ===
* In the ''Kojiki'', '''{{ill|Hikoimasu-no-Ōkimi|ja|彦坐王|lt=Hikoimasu-no-Ōkimi|lt_ja=日子坐王}}''' — born when Waka-Yamato-Neko-Hiko-Obi-bimi-no-Mikoto ({{ill|Emperor Kaika|ja|開化天皇}}) took Okitsu-hime-no-Mikoto, younger sister of Hiko-Kunioketsu-no-Mikoto, ancestor of the {{ill|Wani clan|ja|和邇氏|lt=Wani-no-Omi|lt_ja=丸邇臣}}, as consort — then took Sa-ho-no-Ōkurami-to-me, daughter of Kasuga-no-Takekuni-Katsudome, as consort, and the child they produced was {{ill|Sahohiko|ja|狭穂彦王|lt=Sahobiko-no-Ōkimi|lt_ja=沙本毘子王}}. This Sahobiko-no-Ōkimi is made the ancestor of the Kai no Kuni no Miyatsuko and the {{ill|Kusakabe clan|ja|日下部氏|lt=Kusakabe-no-Muraji|lt_ja=日下部連}}.
* The "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'' records that during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Keikō|ja|景行天皇}}, '''{{ill|Shiomi-no-Sukune|ja|塩海宿禰|lt=Shiomi-no-Sukune|lt_ja=塩海足尼}}''', 4th-generation descendant, son of '''Omishitsuhiko-no-Kimi''', 3rd-generation descendant of Sahohiko-no-Ōkimi, was appointed Kai no Kuni no Miyatsuko.

=== Clan ===
'''{{ill|Kai clan|ja|甲斐氏}}''' (''kai-uji''; {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} of {{ill|Kimi (kabane)|ja|君 (カバネ)|lt=Kimi|lt_ja=君}}), with objections raised about its {{ill|Kōbetsu|ja|皇別}} origins ([[#Studies|see below]]).

=== Studies ===
==== Clan and Kabane of the Kuni no Miyatsuko ====
There is a theory that in the latter half of the {{ill|5th century|ja|5世紀}} to the {{ill|6th century|ja|6世紀}}, farmers and professional groups ruled by local chieftains were organized into units of "be," forming the {{ill|bemin system|ja|部民制}} in which the "be" held by local magnates were governed by central magnates and ''tomo-no-miyatsuko'' who provided tributes and corvée. The kuni no miyatsuko system, a hereditary position appointed by the {{ill|Yamato Kingship|ja|ヤマト王権}} over local magnates to govern provincial be, was also put in order.

In {{ill|Kai Province|ja|甲斐国}}, from the ink inscription on the ''chōyō'' white ashiginu gold-blue bag in the ''{{ill|Shōsōin|ja|正倉院宝物|lt=Shōsōin treasures|lt_ja=正倉院宝物}}'' and from {{ill|bokusho doki|ja|墨書土器|lt=ink-inscribed pottery|lt_ja=墨書土器}} unearthed from the Ōhara Ruins in Ichinomiya-chō, {{ill|Fuefuki, Yamanashi|ja|笛吹市|lt=Fuefuki City|lt_ja=笛吹市}}, it has been confirmed that the {{ill|Kusakabe|ja|日下部}}, a nashiro/koshiro-type be subordinate to the royal family, was established in {{ill|Yamanashi District|ja|山梨郡}}. The Kusakabe was widely distributed in the Tōkaidō and Tōsandō. Regarding their clan and kabane, {{ill|Seki Akira|ja|関晃}} considered them the same-ancestor Kusakabe as recorded in the ''Kojiki'', and estimated that their {{ill|kabane|ja|姓|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} was {{ill|Atai (kabane)|ja|直 (姓)|lt=Atai|lt_ja=直}}, common among local magnates and provincial kuni no miyatsuko, and shared with other be-managing clans in Kai Province, considering that they were in a same-clan relationship with the other be-managing clans. This is the commonly accepted position. On the other hand, {{ill|Suzuki Masanobu|ja|鈴木正信}} estimated "Kai-no-Atai" based on the Nijō-Ōji wooden tablet bearing "Sadaitoneri Kai □" and the fact that the clan names of other kuni no miyatsuko bear place names of the jurisdiction. However, neither position can be confirmed from extant historical sources.

==== Relationships with Other Regions ====
Archaeologically, the tumulus form of {{ill|Kai Chōshizuka Kofun|ja|甲斐銚子塚古墳}}, constructed in the 4th century, and the unearthing of {{ill|triangular-rimmed mirrors with deity and beast designs|ja|三角縁神獣鏡}} from the same kofun, show strong influence from the Kinai kingship.

== Base ==
The center, from Shiomi-no-Sukune onward, was consistently in the northern '''{{ill|Yamanashi District|ja|山梨郡}}'''. Based on archaeological sites and major shrines/rituals, it is thought to be the area from around the former Kasugai-chō of {{ill|Fuefuki, Yamanashi|ja|笛吹市|lt=Fuefuki City|lt_ja=笛吹市}} to the eastern part of {{ill|Kōfu|ja|甲府市|lt=Kōfu City|lt_ja=甲府市}}<ref name="houga2" />.

=== Territory ===
Since no other kuni no miyatsuko was established in {{ill|Kai Province|ja|甲斐国}}, it is thought that the entire Kai Province was ruled.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
'''{{ill|Asama Shrine (Fuefuki)|ja|浅間神社 (笛吹市)|lt=Asama Shrine|lt_ja=浅間神社}}''', the {{ill|ichi-no-miya|ja|一宮}} of {{ill|Kai Province|ja|甲斐国}}.

=== Related Shrines ===
*{{ill|Tamamoro Shrine|ja|玉諸神社}} (''tamamoro-jinja'')
*:A Shikinai rongi shrine enshrined in {{ill|Kōfu|ja|甲府市|lt=Kōfu City|lt_ja=甲府市}}, and the Third Shrine of Kai Province. Hayahiko-no-Sukune, the second kuni no miyatsuko, is said to have performed worship. The former enshrinement site was called Mimuroyama, and the priestly family called themselves Isobe-shi.
*{{ill|Miwa Shrine (Fuefuki)|ja|美和神社 (笛吹市)|lt=Miwa Shrine|lt_ja=美和神社}} (''miwa-jinja'')
*:A Shikinai rongi shrine enshrined in {{ill|Fuefuki, Yamanashi|ja|笛吹市|lt=Fuefuki City|lt_ja=笛吹市}}, and the Second Shrine of Kai Province. Origin is from Shiomi-no-Sukune, the kuni no miyatsuko, being enshrined as chief ritualist during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Keikō|ja|景行天皇|lt=Emperor Keikō|lt_ja=景行朝}}.
*{{ill|Kaina Shrine|ja|甲斐奈神社}} (''kaina-jinja'')
*:Three Shikinai rongi shrines exist. Doi-Moto-biko-no-Ōkimi, the kuni no miyatsuko's ancestor, is said to have started the worship.
*{{ill|Saku Shrine|ja|佐久神社}} (''saku-jinja'')
*:A Shikinai rongi shrine enshrined in Kōfu City. Said to have been founded after the kofun of Doi-Moto-biko-no-Ōkimi was re-interred from Ōmiyayama to Tenjinyama, and built at the original site.
*{{ill|Kanazakura Shrine|ja|金櫻神社}} (''kanazakura-jinja'')
*:A Shikinai rongi shrine enshrined in Kōfu City. Said to have been founded when, in the reign of Emperor Keikō, Shiomi-no-Sukune was ordered to construct the shrine buildings.
*{{ill|Kanazakura Shrine (Yamanashi)|ja|金櫻神社 (山梨市)|lt=Kanazakura Shrine|lt_ja=金櫻神社}} (''kanazakura-jinja'')
*:A Shikinai rongi shrine enshrined in {{ill|Yamanashi, Yamanashi|ja|山梨市|lt=Yamanashi City|lt_ja=山梨市}}. Said to have been founded when Shiomi-no-Sukune, of the Tanba clan in the capital, invited the Hashidate Myōjin from {{ill|Amanohashidate|ja|天橋立}} in his home country.

=== Tombs ===
*'''{{ill|Ōmaruyama Kofun|ja|大丸山古墳}}''' (''ōmaruyama-kofun'')
*:A {{ill|keyhole-shaped kofun|ja|前方後円墳}} in {{ill|Kōfu|ja|甲府市|lt=Kōfu City|lt_ja=甲府市}}, {{ill|Yamanashi Prefecture|ja|山梨県}}, possibly the tomb of Omishitsuhiko-no-Mikoto, the father of Shiomi-no-Sukune, from its mid-{{ill|4th century|ja|4世紀}} construction.
*'''{{ill|Kai Chōshizuka Kofun|ja|甲斐銚子塚古墳}}''' (''kai chōshizuka-kofun'')
*:A keyhole-shaped kofun in Kōfu City, Yamanashi Prefecture, possibly the tomb of Shiomi-no-Sukune, the first kuni no miyatsuko ancestor, from its late 4th century construction.
*'''{{ill|Tenjinyama Kofun (Kōfu)|ja|天神山古墳 (甲府市)|lt=Tenjinyama Kofun|lt_ja=天神山古墳}}''' (''tenjinyama-kofun'')
*:A keyhole-shaped kofun in Kōfu City, Yamanashi Prefecture, possibly the tomb of Hayahiko-no-Sukune, the second kuni no miyatsuko, from its 4th century construction.

== People ==
*'''{{ill|Shiomi-no-Sukune|ja|塩海足尼}}''' (''shiomi no sukune''; Shiomi-no-Sukune, Shiomi-no-Sukune)
*:First kuni no miyatsuko in the reign of {{ill|Emperor Keikō|ja|景行天皇|lt=Emperor Keikō|lt_ja=景行朝}}; involved in the founding of multiple shrines.

== Footnotes ==
{{Reflist|refs=
<ref name="houga2">Hōga Toshio, "[http://wwr2.ucom.ne.jp/hetoyc15/keihu/kaikokuso/kaikok1.htm The Genealogy and Clan of the Kai no Kuni no Miyatsuko]," ''Koju Kinobōma'', 2016.</ref>
}}

== See also ==
* {{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}

== References ==
* ''Kokushi Daijiten'' ({{ill|Yoshikawa Kōbunkan|ja|吉川弘文館}})
* {{ill|Sakamoto Tarō (historian)|ja|坂本太郎 (歴史学者)|lt=Sakamoto Tarō|lt_ja=坂本太郎}} and {{ill|Hirano Kunio|ja|平野邦雄}}, ''Nihon Kodai Shizoku Jinmei Jiten'' (Yoshikawa Kōbunkan)
* ''Nihon-shi Kōjiten'' ({{ill|Yamakawa Shuppansha|ja|山川出版社}})
* ''Shintō Daijiten'' ({{ill|Rinsen Shoten|ja|臨川書店}})
* {{ill|Suzuki Masanobu|ja|鈴木正信}}, "Reexamination of the 'Clan and Kabane' of the Kai no Kuni no Miyatsuko" (''Nihon-shi Kenkyū'' No. 584, 2011)
* Suzuki Masanobu, "A Study on the Genealogy of the Kai no Kuni no Miyatsuko" (''Hikone Ronsō'' No. 391, 2012)


{{DEFAULTSORT:かいのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:日本の歴史関連のスタブ項目]]
[[Category:甲斐国]]
[[Category:甲斐国の氏族]]
[[Category:山梨県の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:甲斐国造]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
