{{出典の明記|date=2017年4月}}
'''Kai clan''' (''kai-shi'') is one of the {{ill|clans|ja|氏族}} of {{ill|Japan|ja|日本}}. Three main branches and others are identified: the {{ill|Kai no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|甲斐国造}} lineage of {{ill|Kai Province|ja|甲斐}}, the {{ill|Fujiwara Northern House|ja|藤原北家}} {{ill|Kikuchi clan|ja|菊池氏}} lineage of {{ill|Higo|ja|肥後}}, and the {{ill|shugodai|ja|守護代}} '''Kai clan''' of {{ill|Echizen Province|ja|越前国|lt=Echizen|lt_ja=越前}}.
== Kai clan (Kai no Kuni no Miyatsuko) ==
{{日本の氏族
|家名 = Kai clan
|家紋 = <!-- 家紋の画像 -->
|家紋名称 =
|本姓 = Kai-no-Kimi
|家祖 =
|種別 = {{ill|Shinbetsu|ja|神別}} ({{ill|Tenjin|ja|天津神|lt=Tenjin|lt_ja=天神}}) or {{ill|Kōbetsu|ja|皇別}}
|出身地 = {{ill|Ōyamato Province|ja|大和国|lt=Ōyamato Province|lt_ja=大倭国}}
|根拠地 = {{ill|Kai Province|ja|甲斐国}}
|人物 =
|支流 = {{ill|Mibu-no-Atai|ja|壬生氏|lt=Mibu-no-Atai|lt_ja=壬生直}}, {{ill|Saegusa-no-Atai|ja|三枝氏|lt=Saegusa-no-Atai|lt_ja=三枝直}} ({{ill|bushi|ja|武家}})<ref>''Saegusa-be-shi Shoki Kōyō''</ref>, Onagase-no-Atai
}}
Begins with {{ill|Shiomi-no-Sukune|ja|塩海足尼}}, 4th-generation descendant of {{ill|Sahohiko-no-Mikoto|ja|狭穂彦命}}.

== Kai clan (Kikuchi clan lineage) ==
{{日本の氏族
|家名= Kai clan
|家紋= Chigai-taka-no-ha.svg
|家紋名称= {{ruby|違い鷹の羽|Chigai-taka-no-ha}}
|本姓= {{ill|Fujiwara Northern House|ja|藤原北家}} {{ill|Kikuchi clan|ja|菊池氏}} lineage{{Sfn|Ōta|1934|p=1691}}
|家祖= {{ill|Kikuchi Takemoto|ja|菊池武本}}{{Sfn|Ōta|1934|p=1691}}
|種別= {{ill|Bushi|ja|武家}}
|出身地= {{ill|Aso Shrine|ja|阿蘇神社}}, {{ill|Higo Province|ja|肥後国}}
|根拠地= {{ill|Higo Province|ja|肥後国}}<br />{{ill|Hyūga Province|ja|日向国}}<br/>{{ill|Mifune Castle|ja|御船城}}, Mashiki District, Higo Province{{Sfn|Ōta|1934|p=1692}}<br/>Takuma District, Higo Province, Kengun Castle{{Sfn|Ōta|1934|p=1692}}<br/>Takachiho Kōchi Castle, Hyūga Province{{Sfn|Ōta|1934|p=1692}}
|人物= {{ill|Kai Shigemura|ja|甲斐重村}}<br />{{ill|Kai Chikanobu|ja|甲斐親宣}}<br />{{ill|Kai Chikanao|ja|甲斐親直}}
}}

A {{ill|kokujin|ja|国人}} lineage that, among the {{ill|cadet branches|ja|庶家}} of the {{ill|Kikuchi clan|ja|菊池氏}} of {{ill|Higo|ja|肥後国}}, settled in {{ill|Takachiho|ja|高千穂}} of {{ill|Hyūga|ja|日向国}} and became a chief vassal of the {{ill|Aso clan|ja|阿蘇氏}} during the {{ill|Sengoku period|ja|戦国時代 (日本)|lt=Sengoku period|lt_ja=戦国時代}}.

The Kai clan began with {{ill|Kikuchi Takemoto|ja|菊池武本}} (alternate name {{ill|Kikuchi Takemura|ja|菊池武村}}), third son of {{ill|Kikuchi Takefusa|ja|菊池武房}}, who distinguished himself during the {{ill|Mongol invasions of Japan|ja|元寇|lt=Mongol invasions|lt_ja=元寇}} in the {{ill|Kamakura period|ja|鎌倉時代}}.

Takemoto disputed the headship with his nephew {{ill|Kikuchi Tokitaka|ja|菊池時隆}} and brought the lawsuit to Kamakura, but lost. Enraged, Takemoto is said to have died stabbing each other with Tokitaka (''Kai Keizu''{{Sfn|Ōta|1934|p=1691}}). Takemoto's son Takemura (or his son Shigemura), fearing later trouble, fled and settled in {{ill|Tsuru District, Yamanashi|ja|都留郡|lt=Tsuru District|lt_ja=都留郡}} of {{ill|Kai Province|ja|甲斐国|lt=Kai|lt_ja=甲斐}} (''Kai Keizu''{{Sfn|Ōta|1934|p=1691}}). This is the origin of the later Kai clan name.

{{ill|Kai Shigemura|ja|甲斐重村|lt=Shigemura|lt_ja=重村}} followed {{ill|Ashikaga Takauji|ja|足利尊氏}} from the early {{ill|Nanboku-chō period|ja|南北朝時代_(日本)|lt=Nanboku-chō period|lt_ja=南北朝}}, receiving a verbal promise to be made Higo shugo. Delighted, Shigemura changed his house name to "Kai," went down to Kyushu in {{ill|Engen|ja|延元}} 3 ([[1338]]), and advanced into Higo together with reinforcements from the {{ill|Ōtomo clan|ja|大友氏}}. However, he was defeated in battle with {{ill|Kikuchi Takeshige|ja|菊池武重}} of the {{ill|Southern Court|ja|南朝 (日本)|lt=Southern Court|lt_ja=南朝}} at the foot of Kuradake in Kōshi District, and could not realize his dream. Afterward, he fled to Bungo, then to Agata (present-day {{ill|Nobeoka|ja|延岡|lt=Nobeoka|lt_ja=縣}} (''agata'')) in Hyūga, seeking refuge with the {{ill|Tsuchimochi clan|ja|土持氏}}, and finally settled at {{ill|Kuraoka|ja|鞍岡}} in Takachiho (present-day {{ill|Gokase, Miyazaki|ja|五ヶ瀬町|lt=Gokase Town|lt_ja=五ヶ瀬町}}), becoming a {{ill|kokujin|ja|国人}} of that area.

The 4th-generation descendant of this Shigemura is {{ill|Kai Chikanobu|ja|甲斐親宣}}. When, due to internal strife in the Aso clan, the former {{ill|Aso daigūji|ja|阿蘇氏|lt=Aso daigūji|lt_ja=阿蘇大宮司}} {{ill|Aso Koretoyo|ja|阿蘇惟豊}} was driven from his homeland like Kai Chikanobu's ancestor and hid at Kuraoka, Kai Chikanobu sympathized deeply, and in {{ill|Eishō|ja|永正}} 14 ([[1517]]), he joined forces with Aso Koretoyo and restored him to the {{ill|Yabe Hama-no-Yakata|ja|浜の館}}, thereby securing his position. After defeating hostile forces and returning Koretoyo to {{ill|Aso District|ja|阿蘇郡}}, he thereafter served as chief vassal to the Aso clan.

In {{ill|Tenbun (era)|ja|天文 (元号)|lt=Tenbun|lt_ja=天文}} 10 ([[1541]]), his son {{ill|Kai Chikanao|ja|甲斐親直}} (Sōun) attacked {{ill|Mifune Fusayuki|ja|御船房行}}, who had secretly communicated with the {{ill|Shimazu clan|ja|島津氏}} and betrayed the Aso daigūji, at {{ill|Mifune Castle|ja|御船城}} in {{ill|Mashiki District|ja|益城郡}}. He became lord of Mifune Castle, and supported the Aso clan as chief elder in both military and diplomatic affairs. Thereafter, the Kai clan expanded throughout Higo, Hyūga, {{ill|Bungo Province|ja|豊後国|lt=Bungo|lt_ja=豊後}}, and {{ill|Satsuma Province|ja|薩摩国|lt=Satsuma|lt_ja=薩摩}}. In particular, {{ill|Kai Chikanao|ja|甲斐親直}} affixed his signature at the end of the seven Aso clan vassal co-signed documents, and together with Sado Shigeyuki, was recognized as highly valued by {{ill|Aso Koremasa|ja|阿蘇惟将}} (''Oguni Mangan-ji Jōmon'', Eiroku 3, 10th month, 11th day).

Today, the surname Kai is very numerous, distributed from northern {{ill|Miyazaki Prefecture|ja|宮崎県}} centered on {{ill|Takachiho, Miyazaki|ja|高千穂町|lt=Takachiho Town|lt_ja=高千穂町}} and {{ill|Gokase, Miyazaki|ja|五ヶ瀬町|lt=Gokase Town|lt_ja=五ヶ瀬町}} in {{ill|Nishi-Usuki District|ja|西臼杵郡}}, within the former Naitō domain whose castle town was at {{ill|Nobeoka|ja|延岡市|lt=Nobeoka City|lt_ja=延岡市}} during the {{ill|Edo period|ja|江戸時代}}, across the Aso caldera outer rim in {{ill|Kumamoto Prefecture|ja|熊本県}}, and around the Kujū Mountains in southern {{ill|Ōita Prefecture|ja|大分県}}.

The {{ill|family crest|ja|家紋}} is the "Chigai-taka-no-ha" (crossed hawk feathers), the same as the Aso clan. Chikanobu sometimes used the "Mitsu-domoe" (three-comma spiral), but this was when he was under the command of the Mitai clan, priests of {{ill|Takachiho Shrine|ja|高千穂神社}}, and he used their family crest "Mitsu-domoe." After becoming a chief vassal of the Aso clan, he is said to have used "Chigai-taka-no-ha."

=== Successive Heads ===
# {{ill|Kai Chikanobu|ja|甲斐親宣}}
# {{ill|Kai Chikanao|ja|甲斐親直}} (Sōun)
# {{ill|Kai Chikahide|ja|甲斐親英}} (Sōryū)

=== Genealogy ===
; Solid lines are biological children, dotted lines (vertical) are adopted children. <!-- 構成の都合で出生順より組み替え -->
{{familytree/start|style="font-size:120%"}}
{{familytree |border=0|01||||| 01={{ill|Kikuchi Takefusa|ja|菊池武房}}}}
{{familytree |border=0| |!||||||}}
{{familytree |border=0|01||||| 01=Takemoto}}
{{familytree |border=0| |!||||||}}
{{familytree |border=0|01||||| 01=Takemura}}
{{familytree |border=0| |!||||||}}
{{familytree |border=0|01||||| 01=Kai Shigemura<sup>1</sup>}}
{{familytree |border=0| |)|-|-|.|||}}
{{familytree |border=0|01|02|||| 01=Shigeyasu<sup>2</sup>|02=Shigenami}}
{{familytree |border=0| |)|-|-|v|-|-|.|||}}
{{familytree |border=0|01|02|03||| 01=Shimojō Shigemasa|02=Shigetsuna<sup>3</sup>|03=Shigehisa}}
{{familytree |border=0| ||||!|||)|-|-|.|||}}
{{familytree |border=0||||01|02|03||| 01={{ill|Chikanobu|ja|甲斐親宣|lt=Chikanobu|lt_ja=親宣}}<sup>4</sup>|02=Atsumasa|03=Ieshiro Seimasa}}
{{familytree |border=0| ||||)|-|-|v|-|-|v|-|-|.|||}}
{{familytree |border=0||||01|02|03|04|| 01={{ill|Chikanao|ja|甲斐親直|lt=Chikanao|lt_ja=親直}}<sup>5</sup>|02=Kumasō Chikamasa|03=Kumasō Akimasa|04=Morimasa}}
{{familytree |border=0| ||||!||||||!|||}}
{{familytree |border=0||||01||||02||| 01={{ill|Chikahide|ja|甲斐親英|lt=Chikahide|lt_ja=親英}}<sup>6</sup>|02=Akimasa}}
{{familytree/end}}
<!--
系譜参考
* [https://web.archive.org/web/20071107202628/http://www.myj7000.jp-biz.net/clan/02/020/02006c.htm#002 日本の名字七千傑] {{ja icon}}
* [http://www2.harimaya.com/sengoku/html/kai_k.html 武家家伝] {{ja icon}}
-->

== Kai clan (Sano clan) ==
A clan that served as {{ill|shugodai|ja|守護代}} of {{ill|Echizen Province|ja|越前国|lt=Echizen|lt_ja=越前}}, {{ill|Tōtōmi Province|ja|遠江国|lt=Tōtōmi|lt_ja=遠江}}, etc. under the Shiba clan{{Efn|{{Quotation|"Buei-sama go-bunkoku Echizen-no-kuni shugodai, Kai Saemon-no-daibu|''{{ill|Ōshū Amarume Kyūki|ja|奥州余目旧記}}''|{{Sfn|Ōta|1934|p=1690}} }} }}. Considered part of the {{ill|Sano clan|ja|佐野氏}}, their origin is thought to be in {{ill|Shimotsuke Province|ja|下野国|lt=Shimotsuke|lt_ja=下野}}, but this is not clearly known.

The Sano clan is said to have begun when {{ill|Sano Motosuna|ja|佐野基綱|lt=Motosuna|lt_ja=基綱}}, son of {{ill|Toyako Aritsuna|ja|戸矢子有綱|lt=Ashikaga Shichirō Aritsuna|lt_ja=足利七郎有綱}}, a descendant of {{ill|Fujiwara no Hidesato|ja|藤原秀郷}}, settled in Sano-shō, Aso District, Shimotsuke, and called himself Sano Tarō. In {{ill|Juei|ja|寿永}} 3 ([[1183]]), during the {{ill|Shida Yoshihiro|ja|源義広 (志田三郎先生)|lt=Shida Yoshihiro|lt_ja=志田義広}} rebellion, while {{ill|Ashikaga Tadatsuna|ja|足利忠綱}} of the main Ashikaga line sided with Yoshihiro and fell from power, Motosuna sided with {{ill|Minamoto no Yoritomo|ja|源頼朝}} together with the {{ill|Oyama clan|ja|小山氏}} and became a {{ill|gokenin|ja|御家人|lt=gokenin|lt_ja=御家人}}. Motosuna's name also appears in the ''Azuma Kagami'' as Sano Tarō Motosuna. He rendered service in the {{ill|Jōkyū War|ja|承久の乱}} of {{ill|Jōkyū|ja|承久}} 3 ([[1222]]), and after the war was appointed to a jitō post in {{ill|Awaji Province|ja|淡路国}}. However, in the {{ill|Hōji War|ja|宝治合戦}} of {{ill|Hōji|ja|宝治}} 1 ([[1247]]), as he sided with the {{ill|Miura clan|ja|三浦氏}}, he fell from power. It seems he survived only as jitō of the original base, Sano-shō.

The fact that the Sano clan family crest is the same as the left-spinning three-comma spiral used at one time by the Kai clan (Kikuchi) of Kyushu, the crest of the Takachiho Shrine priestly family ({{ill|Mitai clan|ja|三田井氏}}); and the fact that the Sano clan's place of origin "Aso District Sano-shō" was anciently written with the same characters as Aso of Kyushu, "Aso District Sano-shō," and was an area where there were {{ill|imperial court|ja|朝廷 (日本)|lt=imperial court|lt_ja=朝廷}} pastures—suggest that the horsemanship-specialist Kai clan of Aso (Kikuchi) and the Mitai clan, with whom they had marital ties, may have migrated from Aso to northern Kantō as horsemanship specialists hired by the {{ill|Hōjō clan|ja|北条氏}}, and a branch may have then split off to Hokuriku after the Jōkyū War.

The Kai clan entered Kyoto as steward when the {{ill|Muromachi shogunate|ja|室町幕府}} was established and the {{ill|Shiba clan|ja|斯波氏}} became {{ill|shugo|ja|守護}} of Echizen. {{ill|Kai Norimitsu|ja|甲斐教光}} (''norimitsu'') gradually rose to prominence; he offered his daughter to {{ill|Shiba Yoshishige|ja|斯波義重}} (later Yoshinori), who bore {{ill|Shiba Yoshisato|ja|斯波義郷}}, thereby solidifying his position. Norimitsu and his son {{ill|Kai Yukinori|ja|甲斐将教}} (''yukinori'') received the {{ill|henki|ja|偏諱}} (the character "nori") from Yoshishige, who was renamed Yoshinori. Also, {{ill|Yukinori|ja|甲斐将教|lt=Yukinori|lt_ja=将教}} (Buddhist name: Yūtoku) became shugodai of Echizen, {{ill|Owari|ja|尾張国|lt=Owari|lt_ja=尾張}}, and {{ill|Tōtōmi|ja|遠江国|lt=Tōtōmi|lt_ja=遠江}}, after which the Kai clan hereditarily held the shugodai offices of Echizen and Tōtōmi (the Owari shugodai office came to be hereditarily held by the {{ill|Oda clan|ja|織田氏}}). The peak came in the generation of Yukinori's son {{ill|Kai Jōji|ja|甲斐常治|lt=Kai Yukihisa|lt_ja=将久}} (''yukihisa'', Buddhist name: Jōji); despite being a rear vassal, his {{ill|house rank|ja|家格}} was so high that he was able to obtain visits from the {{ill|shōgun|ja|征夷大将軍|lt=shōgun|lt_ja=将軍}}.

However, just after the {{ill|Chōroku War|ja|長禄合戦}}, when Jōji died on the 12th day of the 8th month of {{ill|Chōroku|ja|長禄}} 3 ([[1459]]) ({{ill|old calendar|ja|8月12日 (旧暦)|lt=lunar calendar|lt_ja=8月12日 (旧暦)}}), the rapidly rising {{ill|Asakura clan|ja|朝倉氏}} began to press especially hard in Echizen.

In the {{ill|Ōnin War|ja|応仁の乱}}, {{ill|Kai Toshimitsu|ja|甲斐敏光}} (son of Yukihisa) sided with the Western Army, but was put in a difficult position when {{ill|Asakura Takakage (7th head)|ja|朝倉孝景 (7代当主)|lt=Asakura Takakage|lt_ja=朝倉孝景}}, who was also in the Western Army, defected to the Eastern Army. Ultimately, the Kai clan lost their foothold in Echizen. Thereafter, they moved their base to Tōtōmi and were active as Tōtōmi shugodai.

However, unlike the {{ill|Asakura clan|ja|朝倉氏}} of Echizen and the {{ill|Oda clan|ja|織田氏}} of Owari, they did not develop into {{ill|sengoku daimyō|ja|戦国大名}}. This was due to the fierce invasion of Tōtōmi by the {{ill|Imagawa clan|ja|今川氏}} of neighboring {{ill|Suruga Province|ja|駿河国|lt=Suruga|lt_ja=駿河}}. Thereafter, they retired from the main stage of history.

=== Successive Heads ===
# {{ill|Kai Norimitsu|ja|甲斐教光}}
# {{ill|Kai Yukinori|ja|甲斐将教}} (Yūtoku)
# {{ill|Kai Jōji|ja|甲斐常治|lt=Kai Yukihisa|lt_ja=甲斐将久}} (Jōji)
# {{ill|Kai Toshimitsu|ja|甲斐敏光}}
# {{ill|Kai Nobuhisa|ja|甲斐信久}}

== Footnotes ==
<!-- === 注釈 === -->
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
{{Notelist}}
<!-- === 出典 === -->
{{Reflist}}

== References ==
* {{オープンアクセス}}{{Citation|和書|last=Ōta|first=Akira|author-link=太田亮|others={{ill|Ueda Kazutoshi|ja|上田萬年}} and {{ill|Mikami Sanji|ja|三上参次}}, eds.|chapter=Kai カヒ|pages=1689-1693|volume=1|date=1934|title=Seishi Kakei Daijiten|publisher=Seishi Kakei Daijiten Kankōkai|id={{全国書誌番号|47004572}}|url={{NDLDC|1130845/918}} National Diet Library Digital Collections|ncid=BN05000207|oclc=673726070|ref=harv}}

== See also ==
* {{ill|Kikuchi clan|ja|菊池氏}}
* {{ill|Tsuchimochi clan|ja|土持氏}}
* {{ill|Mifune Castle|ja|御船城}}
* {{ill|Higo Kokujin Ikki|ja|肥後国人一揆}}
* {{ill|Shiba clan|ja|斯波氏}}
* {{ill|Asakura clan|ja|朝倉氏}}
* {{ill|Chōroku War|ja|長禄合戦}}


{{DEFAULTSORT:かいし}}
[[Category:甲斐氏|*]]
[[Category:菊池氏|*か]]
[[Category:日本の氏族]]
[[Category:守護代を輩出した氏族]]
[[Category:九州地方の氏族]]
[[Category:東海地方の氏族]]
[[Category:甲斐国の氏族]]
[[Category:肥後国の氏族]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:甲斐氏]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
