{{基礎情報 公家
| 氏名 = Osashi
| 画像 =
| 画像サイズ =
| 画像説明 =
| 時代 = {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代}}
| 生誕 = Unknown
| 死没 = 12th day, 9th month, {{ill|Emperor Ingyō|ja|允恭天皇}} 14
| 改名 =
| 諡号 =
| 神号 =
| 戒名 =
| 墓所 = One theory: Ishi-no-Neya Kofun
| 官位 =
| 主君 = {{ill|Emperor Ingyō|ja|允恭天皇}}
| 氏族 = {{ill|Naga clan|ja|長氏|lt=Naga-no-Kimi|lt_ja=長公}}
| 父母 =
| 兄弟 =
| 妻   =
| 子   =
| 特記事項 =
}}
'''Osashi''' (''osashi''; {{ill|dates of birth and death unknown|ja|生没年不詳}}) was a {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代}} {{ill|gōzoku|ja|豪族}}.

== Overview ==
According to the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'', he was an {{ill|ama (sea people)|ja|海人|lt=ama|lt_ja=海人}} (fisherman) of {{ill|Naga-mura|ja|那賀郡|lt=Naga-mura|lt_ja=長邑}}, {{ill|Awa Province (Tokushima)|ja|阿波国|lt=Awa Province|lt_ja=阿波国}}.

On the 12th day of the 9th month of {{ill|Emperor Ingyō|ja|允恭天皇}} 14, when the Emperor attempted to hunt on {{ill|Awaji Island|ja|淡路島}}, he could not catch a single animal all day. So when he stopped hunting and performed divination, the island deity cursed him and said, "The reason you cannot obtain beasts is my heart. There is a {{ill|pearl|ja|真珠}} at the bottom of the {{ill|Akashi|ja|明石|lt=Akashi|lt_ja=赤石}} sea. If you enshrine that jewel for me, you shall obtain all beasts." So, ama (fishermen) were gathered from various places and sent to search the Akashi seabed, but the water was too deep and they could not reach the bottom.

However, among the ama was Osashi, the most skilled. Osashi tied a rope to his waist and dove to the sea bottom, and after a while came up and said, "There is a great abalone at the sea bottom, and it is shining there." All the people said, "Perhaps the jewel that the island deity requests is in the belly of this {{ill|abalone|ja|アワビ|lt=abalone|lt_ja=蝮}}." Osashi dove into the sea again and came back up embracing a great abalone, but lost his breath and died on the waves. When they lowered the rope to measure the depth, it was 60 hiro (fathoms).

Immediately cutting open the abalone's belly to check, they found a pearl the size of a {{ill|peach|ja|桃}} fruit. When they enshrined it to the island deity, they obtained many beasts. However, grieving that Osashi had entered the sea and died, they built a tomb and buried him with great ceremony, and that tomb is said to still exist today.

There is a legend that the Ishi-no-Neya Kofun in {{ill|Awaji, Hyōgo|ja|淡路市|lt=Awaji City|lt_ja=淡路市}}, {{ill|Hyōgo Prefecture|ja|兵庫県}}, is the tomb of Osashi, but this {{ill|kofun|ja|古墳}} is dated to the {{ill|6th century|ja|6世紀}} and does not match the era of Emperor Ingyō. There is also a legend at the {{ill|Jūni Shrine (Naruto)|ja|十二神社 (鳴門市)|lt=Jūni Shrine|lt_ja=十二神社}} in {{ill|Satoura-chō Satoura|ja|里浦町里浦}}, {{ill|Naruto, Tokushima|ja|鳴門市|lt=Naruto City|lt_ja=鳴門市}}, {{ill|Tokushima Prefecture|ja|徳島県}}, that this is the tomb of Osashi.

== Footnotes ==
{{reflist}}

== See also ==
*{{ill|Kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}}
*{{ill|List of Figures from before the Asuka Period|ja|飛鳥時代以前の人物一覧}}


{{DEFAULTSORT:おさし}}
[[Category:日本神話の人物]]
[[Category:古墳時代の人物]]
[[Category:古代日本の人物]]
[[Category:阿波国の人物]]
[[Category:徳島県の歴史]]
[[Category:生没年不詳]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:男狭磯]]
