'''Shirakawa no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''shirakawa no kuni no miyatsuko'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled [[#Territory|Shirakawa Province]], said to have been located in {{ill|Shirakawa District|ja|白河郡|lt=Shirakawa District (Shirakawa no Kōri)|lt_ja=白河郡（しらかわのこおり）}} of {{ill|Mutsu Province|ja|陸奥国}} in the {{ill|ritsuryō system|ja|令制国|lt=ritsuryō provinces|lt_ja=令制国}} (present-day {{ill|Shirakawa, Fukushima|ja|白河市|lt=Shirakawa City|lt_ja=白河市}}, {{ill|Nishi-Shirakawa District|ja|西白河郡}}, {{ill|Higashi-Shirakawa District|ja|東白川郡}}, and {{ill|Ishikawa District, Fukushima|ja|石川郡 (福島県)|lt=Ishikawa District|lt_ja=石川郡}}, {{ill|Fukushima Prefecture|ja|福島県}}).

== Overview ==

=== Ancestry ===
* According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'', in the 5th year of {{ill|Emperor Seimu|ja|成務天皇|lt=Emperor Seimu|lt_ja=成務朝}}, '''Shioi-no-Koji-no-Atai''' (''shioi no koji no atai''), 11th-generation descendant of Amakudari-Amayutsuhiko-no-Mikoto, was appointed Shirakawa no Kuni no Miyatsuko.

=== Clan ===
* Among the {{ill|Tōsandō|ja|東山道}}-lineage kuni no miyatsuko of the same clan as the Tamasuri clan, it is considered kin to the {{ill|Shinobu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|信夫国造}}, {{ill|Somewa no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|染羽国造}}, {{ill|Iku no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|伊久国造}}, and {{ill|Shida no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|思太国造}}.
* Descendants include the Inoue clan and others. In Keichō 5 (1600), a land survey was conducted at Ino-gō (part of present-day Tanagura Town), and about 10 individuals bearing the surname Inoue, including powerful local figures such as Inoue Shinano-no-Kami, Inoue Izumi-no-Kami, and Inoue Bingo, are listed on the land survey records.

=== Historic Sites ===

* In Miyashita, {{ill|Tanagura, Fukushima|ja|棚倉町|lt=Tanagura Town|lt_ja=棚倉町}}, {{ill|Higashi-Shirakawa District|ja|東白川郡}}, Fukushima Prefecture, there is the Ino Jizōson, which enshrines Shioi-no-Koji-no-Atai. Shioi-no-Koji-no-Atai is said to have resided where this Jizō is placed, and there is said to have been a small shrine or torii there at the time. However, as the idea of {{ill|syncretism of Shinto and Buddhism|ja|神仏習合}} spread over time, Shioi-no-Koji-no-Atai, originally an object of Shinto worship, was transformed into a Jizō, an object of Buddhist worship, and his achievements have been transmitted down to the present.
* The "Baba Kofun," said to be the tomb of Shioi-no-Koji-no-Atai, is located on Komaruyama behind Baba {{ill|Tsutsukowake Shrine|ja|都々古別神社}}<ref>{{Cite book |和書|title=Tanagura-machi Ōaza Enkakushi|date=|year=1980|publisher=Rekishi Shunjūsha|last=Tanagura-machi Kyōiku Iinkai|page=4}}</ref>.

=== Place Names ===
According to the homepage of {{ill|Tanagura, Fukushima|ja|棚倉町|lt=Tanagura Town|lt_ja=棚倉町}}, {{ill|Higashi-Shirakawa District|ja|東白川郡}}, Fukushima Prefecture, because Shioi-no-Koji-no-Atai himself took up plow and hoe, cleared the desolate wilderness, and served the people's welfare, the local people, in gratitude, came to call this land "Ino" and later "Irino." Many documents confirm that until the early Meiji period, parts of the town used place names derived from his name, such as Ino-gō, Ino-kami Village, and Ino-shimo Village, so it can be inferred that the town and Shioi-no-Koji-no-Atai had a deep connection. The current town name derives from the name of the former {{ill|Tanagura Domain|ja|棚倉藩}}.

== Base ==

=== Territory ===
The territory of the kuni no miyatsuko was the region then called '''Shirakawa Province''', corresponding to the later {{ill|ritsuryō province|ja|令制国}} of {{ill|Mutsu Province|ja|陸奥国}} '''{{ill|Shirakawa District|ja|白河郡}}''', equivalent to present-day {{ill|Shirakawa, Fukushima|ja|白河市|lt=Shirakawa City|lt_ja=白河市}}, {{ill|Nishi-Shirakawa District|ja|西白河郡}}, {{ill|Higashi-Shirakawa District|ja|東白川郡}}, and {{ill|Ishikawa District|ja|石川郡}} in {{ill|Fukushima Prefecture|ja|福島県}}.

Under the ritsuryō system, for a short period from {{ill|Yōrō|ja|養老}} 2 (718) to Yōrō 6 (722) or to the 3rd month of {{ill|Jinki|ja|神亀}} 1 (724), this area was split off from Mutsu Province into {{ill|Iwase Province|ja|石背国}}. The {{ill|Shirakawa-no-Seki|ja|白河の関}}, guarding against the {{ill|Emishi|ja|蝦夷}} as the northern limit of {{ill|Yamato Kingship|ja|ヤマト王権}}, is said to have been here, and after the construction of {{ill|Taga Castle|ja|多賀城}}, which represents the {{ill|Yamato court's northern advance|ja|大和朝廷の北進}}, it became the base of the Shirakawa-dan, which defended there.

== Tutelary Shrine, etc. ==
* {{ill|Shirakawa Shrine|ja|白河神社}} – According to shrine tradition, Shioi-no-Koji-no-Atai was enshrined in Seimu 5. It is enshrined at 120 Hatajuku-Sekinomori, Shirakawa City, Fukushima Prefecture, where the Shirakawa-no-Seki is said to have been.
* {{ill|Shirakawa Funada-Motonuma Ruins Group|ja|白河舟田・本沼遺跡群}} – The {{ill|Shimousa-zuka Kofun|ja|白河舟田・本沼遺跡群#下総塚古墳|lt=Shimousa-zuka Kofun|lt_ja=下総塚古墳}} included in this ruins group is estimated to have been constructed in the latter half of the 6th century, and there is a theory that it is the tomb of the Shirakawa no Kuni no Miyatsuko.

== Footnotes ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
=== Notes ===
{{notelist}}
=== Citations ===
{{Reflist}}

== See also ==
* {{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}
** ({{ill|Iwase Province|ja|石背国}}: {{ill|Nakadōri|ja|中通り}}) '''Shirakawa-no-Seki''': Shirakawa (Shirakawa District) - {{ill|Iwase|ja|石背国造|lt=Iwase|lt_ja=石背}} ({{ill|Iwase District|ja|岩瀬郡}}) - {{ill|Asaka|ja|阿尺国造|lt=Asaka|lt_ja=阿尺}} ({{ill|Asaka District|ja|安積郡}}) - {{ill|Shinobu|ja|信夫国造|lt=Shinobu|lt_ja=信夫}} ({{ill|Shinobu District|ja|信夫郡}})
** ({{ill|Iwaki Province|ja|石城国}}: {{ill|Hamadōri|ja|浜通り}}) '''Kikuta-no-Seki''' ({{ill|Nakoso-no-Seki|ja|勿来関}}): {{ill|Kikuta|ja|道奥菊多国造|lt=Kikuta|lt_ja=菊多}} ({{ill|Kikuta District|ja|菊多郡}}) - {{ill|Iwaki|ja|石城国造|lt=Iwaki|lt_ja=石城}} ({{ill|Iwaki District (Mutsu)|ja|磐城郡|lt=Iwaki District|lt_ja=磐城郡}}) - {{ill|Somewa|ja|染羽国造|lt=Somewa|lt_ja=染羽}} ({{ill|Shineha District|ja|標葉郡}}) - {{ill|Ukita|ja|浮田国造|lt=Ukita|lt_ja=浮田}} ({{ill|Uda District, Mutsu|ja|宇多郡|lt=Uda District|lt_ja=宇多郡}}) - {{ill|Iku|ja|伊久国造|lt=Iku|lt_ja=伊久}} ({{ill|Igu District|ja|伊具郡}}) - {{ill|Shi|ja|思国造|lt=Shi|lt_ja=思}} ({{ill|Shida District|ja|志田郡}})
**: ※ Order is from south to north. There is no kuni no miyatsuko bearing the name of {{ill|Aizu District|ja|会津郡}}, which belonged to Iwase Province, or {{ill|Namekata District, Fukushima|ja|行方郡 (福島県)|lt=Namekata District|lt_ja=行方郡}}, which belonged to Iwaki Province.
* {{ill|Shirakawa-Yūki clan|ja|白河結城氏}}

{{Japanese-history-stub}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:しらかわのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:陸奥国]]
[[Category:福島県の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:白河国造]]
