'''Sagamu no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''sagamu no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''sagamu kokuzō'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled the eastern part of {{ill|Sagami Province|ja|相模国}}.

== Overview ==
=== Writing ===
In the ''{{ill|Kojiki|ja|古事記}}'' and the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'', it is written as '''Sagamu no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''.

=== Ancestry ===
* According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'', during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Seimu|ja|成務天皇|lt=Emperor Seimu|lt_ja=成務朝}}, '''Ototakehiko-no-Mikoto''' (''ototakehiko no mikoto''), 3rd-generation descendant of {{ill|Ise-tsu-hiko|ja|伊勢津彦|lt=Kamu-Isetsu-hiko|lt_ja=神伊勢都彦}}, the ancestor of the "{{ill|Munasashi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|胸刺国造|lt=Busashi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|lt_ja=武刺国造}}," was appointed Sagamu no Kuni no Miyatsuko.
* The ''{{ill|Kojiki|ja|古事記}}'' states that {{ill|Yamato Takeru|ja|倭建命}} was subjected to a {{ill|fire attack|ja|天叢雲剣|lt=fire attack|lt_ja=火攻め}} by the Sagamu no Kuni no Miyatsuko, but in the official history, the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'', it was not the kuni no miyatsuko but bandits of {{ill|Suruga Province|ja|駿河国}}, and the place name {{ill|Yaizu, Shizuoka|ja|焼津市|lt=Yaizu|lt_ja=焼津}} still remains today.

=== Clan ===
'''{{ill|Mibu clan|ja|壬生氏}}''' or '''{{ill|Nuribe clan|ja|漆部氏}}''' (''mibu-uji'', ''nuribe-uji''; both with {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} of {{ill|Atai (kabane)|ja|直 (姓)|lt=Atai|lt_ja=直}}). Considered kin to the {{ill|Izumo clan|ja|出雲氏}}, who were of the {{ill|Tenson|ja|天孫族}} lineage. The Nuribe clan later changed their surname to '''Sagami-no-Sukune''', and among the clan are {{ill|Nuribe-no-Iwa|ja|漆部伊波}} and {{ill|Rōben|ja|良弁}}.

== Base ==
Four centers are considered as the base of the kuni no miyatsuko, all along the ancient {{ill|coastline|ja|海岸}}: the area around {{ill|Samukawa, Kanagawa|ja|寒川町|lt=Samukawa|lt_ja=寒川}} on the left bank of the {{ill|Sagami River|ja|相模川}}, where the main shrine Samukawa Shrine is located; the area around {{ill|Hiratsuka, Kanagawa|ja|平塚市|lt=Hiratsuka|lt_ja=平塚}} on the right bank of the Sagami River; the area around {{ill|Ebina, Kanagawa|ja|海老名市|lt=Ebina|lt_ja=海老名}} on the {{ill|plateau|ja|台地}}; and the area around {{ill|Isehara, Kanagawa|ja|伊勢原市|lt=Isehara|lt_ja=伊勢原}} at the {{ill|foothills|ja|山麓}}. As for the chronological division of these four centers, it is generally thought that development progressed from the coast toward the inland. Also, Samukawa and Ebina are connected by the {{ill|Mekujiri River|ja|目久尻川}}, and the Mekujiri basin is thought to have been developed as a unit. The Mekujiri River, which flows through the center of Kōza District, is deeply connected to {{ill|Samukawa Shrine|ja|寒川神社}}, the main shrine of the Sagamu no Kuni no Miyatsuko, and many place names and traditions related to Samukawa Shrine remain in its basin, as do many ancient historic sites such as the nationally designated {{ill|historic site|ja|史跡}} {{ill|Akibayama Kofun Group|ja|秋葉山古墳群}}.

=== Territory ===
The Sagamu no Kuni no Miyatsuko ruled the area then called '''Sagamu Province''', corresponding to the later eastern part of '''{{ill|Sagami Province|ja|相模国}}''', specifically the {{ill|Kōza District|ja|高座郡}}, {{ill|Ōsumi District, Sagami|ja|大住郡|lt=Ōsumi District|lt_ja=大住郡}}, and {{ill|Aikō District|ja|愛甲郡}} along the {{ill|Sagami River|ja|相模川}} basin.

After the centralized {{ill|ritsuryō system|ja|律令制}} was established through the {{ill|Taika Reform|ja|大化の改新}}, Sagamu Province and Shinaga (Shinaga) Province merged to form {{ill|Sagami Province|ja|相模国}}. Based on kofun and {{ill|Shikinai-sha|ja|延喜式神名帳|lt=Shikinai-sha|lt_ja=式内社}} relations, it is thought that just after its establishment, Sagami Province's political center of influence was the former Sagamu Province, where the provincial capital was also located. In the late {{ill|Heian period|ja|平安時代}}, it is estimated that the Sagami {{ill|provincial capital|ja|国府}} moved to present-day {{ill|Ōiso, Kanagawa|ja|大磯町|lt=Ōiso|lt_ja=大磯町}} for transportation convenience. Generally, the late Heian period, when the provincial capital moved to Ōiso, is estimated as the time when the {{ill|ichi-no-miya|ja|一宮}} system emerged. Since Sagami Province was originally formed from the merger of the former Sagamu Province and the former Shinaga Province, a dispute arose over which would be the ichi-no-miya—{{ill|Samukawa Shrine|ja|寒川神社}}, the main shrine of the Sagamu no Kuni no Miyatsuko, or {{ill|Kawawa Shrine|ja|川勾神社}}, the main shrine of the Shinaga no Kuni no Miyatsuko. This is the "Zamondō" of the {{ill|Kōnomiya Matsuri|ja|国府祭}}, which continues to this day. The Kōnomiya Matsuri, which tells the story of Sagami Province's formation in modern times, is designated as an {{ill|intangible folk cultural property|ja|民俗文化財|lt=intangible folk cultural property|lt_ja=無形民俗文化財}} of {{ill|Kanagawa Prefecture|ja|神奈川県}}.

== People ==
*Nuribe-no-Iwa (''nuribe no iwa'')
*:In {{ill|Tenpyō|ja|天平}} 20 ([[748]]), he donated 20,000 rolls of merchant cloth as an offering for the construction of the Great Buddha Hall at {{ill|Tōdai-ji|ja|東大寺}}, and was promoted from Jū-shichii-jō to Ge-jū-goi-ge. Around {{ill|Tenpyō-hōji|ja|天平宝字}} 4 ([[760]]), he owned land in {{ill|Nishinari District|ja|西成郡}}, {{ill|Settsu Province|ja|摂津国}}, and is considered to have already established a base in the Kinai. After serving as Sado-no-kami and Zōzoku-no-kami, he rendered meritorious service in quelling the {{ill|Rebellion of Fujiwara no Nakamaro|ja|藤原仲麻呂の乱}}, and was granted Jū-goi-ge and Kun-rokutō. After the rebellion, he served as Ukyōe-no-suke, Yamato-no-suke, Shuri-no-jikan, Genba-no-suke, Kosui-no-kami, and Owari-no-kami. During this time, in {{ill|Jingo-keiun|ja|神護景雲}} 2 ([[768]]), he was granted the surname Sagami-no-Sukune and appointed {{ill|Sagami Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造|lt=Sagami Kuni no Miyatsuko|lt_ja=相模国国造}}<ref>Kotobank "Nuribe-no-Iwa [https://kotobank.jp/word/漆部伊波-1099880]</ref>.
*Sagami-no-Sukune Akomaro (''sagami no sukune akomaro'')
*:In {{ill|Ninna|ja|仁和}} 1 ([[885]]), 31 men and women of {{ill|Soekami District|ja|添上郡}}, {{ill|Yamato Province|ja|大和国}} commoners — including the Jū-shichii-jō {{ill|Sagami Akomaro|ja|相模阿古麻呂}}, Jū-hachii-ge {{ill|Sagami Kadonushi|ja|相模門主}}, and Jū-hachii-jō {{ill|Sagami Uomaro|ja|相模魚麻呂}} — moved to {{ill|Shibukawa District|ja|渋川郡}}, {{ill|Kawachi Province|ja|河内国}}. Akomaro and others petitioned as follows: the honkan (original registration) of his father, Shō-rokui-jō {{ill|Sagami Jinmaro|ja|相模仁麻呂}}, was Yashima-gō, Soekami District, Yamato Province. In {{ill|Kōnin|ja|弘仁}} 5 ([[814]]), he was appointed Kawachi-daigen, and after being dismissed from office, he resided in Ōchi-gō, Shibukawa District, Kawachi Province. Later, since his descendants had become numerous, he requested that his honkan be removed and changed to Kawachi Province. The court permitted registration as his honkan in the household registry<ref>''Nihon Sandai Jitsuroku'', Ninna 1, 9th month, 21st day, Mizunoe-tora entry</ref>.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
*'''{{ill|Samukawa Shrine|ja|寒川神社}}''' (''samukawa-jinja'')
*:A shrine enshrined in {{ill|Samukawa, Kanagawa|ja|寒川町|lt=Samukawa Town|lt_ja=寒川町}}, {{ill|Kōza District|ja|高座郡}}, {{ill|Kanagawa Prefecture|ja|神奈川県}}, and the {{ill|ichi-no-miya|ja|一之宮}} of {{ill|Sagami Province|ja|相模国}}. In {{ill|Chiba (city)|ja|千葉市|lt=Chiba City|lt_ja=千葉市}}, {{ill|Chiba Prefecture|ja|千葉県}}, the {{ill|Samukawa Shrine (Chiba)|ja|寒川神社 (千葉市)|lt=Samukawa Shrine|lt_ja=寒川神社}} enshrined by the kindred {{ill|Chiba no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|千葉国造}} is located<ref name="izumo">{{ill|Hōga Toshio|ja|宝賀寿男}}, "Part 3: Kindred Lineages of the Early Branching Expanded to the Kinai and Tōgoku, 2. Musashi no Kuni no Miyatsuko and the Various Tōgoku Kuni no Miyatsuko Clans" (''Kodai Shizoku no Kenkyū 16: Izumo-shi, Haji-shi — Rise and Fall of the Original Izumo Kingdom'', Aogaki Shuppan, 2020, pp. 263, 264)</ref>.

=== Related Shrines ===
*{{ill|Ōyama Afuri Shrine|ja|大山阿夫利神社}} (''ōyama afuri-jinja'')
*:A {{ill|Shikinai-sha|ja|式内社}} enshrined in {{ill|Isehara, Kanagawa|ja|伊勢原市|lt=Isehara City|lt_ja=伊勢原市}}, Kanagawa Prefecture. It has been pointed out that the Sagamu no Kuni no Miyatsuko clan was involved in its worship<ref name="izumo"/>.
*{{ill|Sōbu Kokuzō Shrine|ja|相武国造神社}} (''sōbu kokuzō-jinja'')
*:A shrine enshrined in {{ill|Hiratsuka, Kanagawa|ja|平塚市|lt=Hiratsuka City|lt_ja=平塚市}}, Kanagawa Prefecture. It enshrines {{ill|Yamato Takeru|ja|日本武尊}}.

=== Tombs ===
No specific identification has been made between the Sagamu no Kuni no Miyatsuko and their kofun, but the {{ill|kofun|ja|古墳}} considered to be chieftain-class include '''{{ill|Shindo-Ōzukayama Kofun|ja|真土大塚山古墳}}''', '''{{ill|Hyōtanzuka Kofun (Ebina)|ja|瓢箪塚古墳 (海老名市)|lt=Hyōtanzuka Kofun|lt_ja=瓢箪塚古墳}}''', and '''{{ill|Rachimen Kofun|ja|埒免古墳}}'''. The tomb of Ototakehiko-no-Mikoto, the first Sagamu no Kuni no Miyatsuko, is said to be '''{{ill|Ōkamizuka Kofun|ja|大神塚古墳}}''', said to have been constructed by later descendants in commemoration.

== Footnotes ==
{{Notelist}}
{{reflist}}

== See also ==
* {{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}
* {{ill|Shinaga no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|師長国造}} – The kuni no miyatsuko who ruled the western part of Sagami Province.

== References ==
* ''Kokushi Daijiten'' (Yoshikawa Kōbunkan)
* {{ill|Sakamoto Tarō (historian)|ja|坂本太郎 (歴史学者)|lt=Sakamoto Tarō|lt_ja=坂本太郎}} and {{ill|Hirano Kunio|ja|平野邦雄}}, supervising eds., ''Nihon Kodai Shizoku Jinmei Jiten'' (Yoshikawa Kōbunkan, 1990)
* ''Nihon-shi Kōjiten'' (Yamakawa Shuppansha)
* ''Shintō Daijiten'' (Rinsen Shoten)

{{DEFAULTSORT:さかむのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:日本の歴史関連のスタブ項目]]
[[Category:相模国]]
[[Category:神奈川県の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:相武国造]]
