{{Infobox organization
| name        = Makoto no Michi
| native_name = 宗教法人 真の道
| founded     = 1952 (Shōwa 27)
| founder     = {{ill|Hagiwara Makoto|ja|萩原真}}
| type        = Religious corporation
| headquarters= 4-16-3 Kasuya, {{ill|Setagaya|ja|世田谷区}}, {{ill|Tokyo|ja|東京都}}
| language    = Japanese
}}

'''Makoto no Michi''' (''makoto no michi'') is a {{ill|Japanese new religion|ja|新宗教}} of {{ill|Japan|ja|日本}}. Its founder is {{ill|Hagiwara Makoto|ja|萩原真}}.

== Overview ==
In [[1948]] ({{ill|Shōwa|ja|昭和}} 23), a spirit research group formed the "Chidori-kai." The following year, [[1949]] (Shōwa 24), {{ill|Hagiwara Makoto|ja|萩原真}}, who had returned from {{ill|China|ja|中国}} after the end of the war, became the teacher, and the Chidori-kai was incorporated as a religious corporation. In [[1952]] (Shōwa 27), it was renamed from "Chidori-kai" to the current Makoto no Michi.<ref>1978, Ōkura Shuppan, ''Shinshūkyō no Sekai''.</ref>

Also, according to ''Irie Nikki'' by {{ill|Irie Sukemasa|ja|入江相政}}, a close aide of {{ill|Emperor Shōwa|ja|昭和天皇}}, {{ill|Imaki Yoshiko|ja|今城誼子}}, a lady-in-waiting of {{ill|Empress Kōjun|ja|香淳皇后}}, was a believer, and the religion is said to have influenced the Empress as well, though this is not certain.<ref>"The Empress became infatuated with a new religious 'guru'!? The 'religious organization' seen as a problem by the Imperial Household Agency, and the unknown facts of the Imperial Family," ''Cyzo Woman'', March 20, 2021. Retrieved April 6, 2024.</ref><ref>Kawahara Toshiaki, ''Shōwa no Kōshitsu wo Yurugaseta Joseitachi''.</ref>

== History ==
* [[1948]] (Shōwa 23) – The "Chidori-kai" is formed by a spirit research group. The bulletin "Chidori" is published.<ref>"Makoto no Michi Nenpyō," Makoto no Michi Official Site. Retrieved April 6, 2024.</ref><ref>2014, Gyōsei, ''Shūkyō Nenkan''.</ref>
* [[1949]] (Shōwa 24) – {{ill|Hagiwara Makoto|ja|萩原真}} becomes the teacher, and the Chidori-kai is incorporated as a religious corporation.<ref>"Makoto no Michi Nenpyō," Makoto no Michi Official Site. Retrieved April 6, 2024.</ref>
* [[1952]] (Shōwa 27) – Renamed from "Chidori-kai" to the current "Makoto no Michi."<ref>Ibid.</ref>
* [[1960]] (Shōwa 35) – The headquarters shrine is established in {{ill|Daita|ja|代田}}, {{ill|Setagaya|ja|世田谷区}}.<ref>Ibid.</ref>
* [[1972]] (Shōwa 47) – The "Oku-miya" is established in {{ill|Ura-Takao-chō|ja|裏高尾町}}, {{ill|Hachiōji, Tokyo|ja|八王子市|lt=Hachiōji City|lt_ja=八王子市}}.<ref>Ibid.</ref>
* [[1983]] (Shōwa 58) – The Sorei-den is established in Ura-Takao-chō, Hachiōji City.<ref>Ibid.</ref>
* [[1986]] (Shōwa 61) – Omote-miya, the headquarters facility, is established in Kasuya, Setagaya Ward.<ref>Ibid.</ref>
* [[1999]] ({{ill|Heisei|ja|平成}} 11) – The main hall of "Tsuki-miya" is established in {{ill|Nasu, Tochigi|ja|那須町|lt=Nasu Town|lt_ja=那須町}}, {{ill|Tochigi Prefecture|ja|栃木県}}.<ref>Ibid.</ref>
* [[2000]] (Heisei 12) – The worship hall, Kumite Kaikan, and new Sorei-den of "Nigimitama-no-Miya" are established in Nasu Town, Tochigi Prefecture.<ref>Ibid.</ref>
* [[2001]] (Heisei 13) – "Tsuki-miya," the Italian branch, is established in {{ill|Assisi|ja|アッシジ}}, {{ill|Italy|ja|イタリア}}.<ref>Ibid.</ref>
* [[2005]] (Heisei 17) – "Shizume-akashi," a movement to console the spirits of the {{ill|2004 Indian Ocean earthquake|ja|スマトラ島沖地震|lt=Sumatra-Andaman earthquake|lt_ja=スマトラ島沖地震}}, begins.<ref>Ibid.</ref>
* [[2008]] (Heisei 20) – The Shinjitsu-kyū Himorogi is completed at the Oku-miya (Naobi-no-Miya) in Ura-Takao-chō, Hachiōji City.<ref>Ibid.</ref>
* [[2011]] (Heisei 23) – After the occurrence of the {{ill|2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami|ja|東日本大震災|lt=Great East Japan Earthquake|lt_ja=東日本大震災}}, the name is changed from "Shizume-akashi" to "Chinkon-akashi."<ref>Ibid.</ref>

== Successive Teachers ==
The organization uses the term "oshie-nushi" (teacher).
{| class="wikitable"
! Generation !! Name !! Year of Office !! Year of Retirement
|-
| 1st || {{ill|Hagiwara Makoto|ja|萩原真}} || 1949 || 1982
|-
| 2nd || Hagiwara Shinmei || 1982 || present
|}

== Main Facilities ==
→ For branches of Makoto no Michi, see the [https://www.makoto.or.jp/ branches on the official site].
* Omote-miya (Aramitama-no-Miya) – 4-16-3 Kasuya, {{ill|Setagaya|ja|世田谷区}}, {{ill|Tokyo|ja|東京都}}
* Tsuki-miya (Nigimitama-no-Miya) – 1186-36 Michinoue, Toyohara-Otsuji, {{ill|Nasu, Tochigi|ja|那須町|lt=Nasu Town|lt_ja=那須町}}, {{ill|Nasu District, Tochigi|ja|那須郡|lt=Nasu District|lt_ja=那須郡}}, {{ill|Tochigi Prefecture|ja|栃木県}}
* Oku-miya (Naobi-no-Miya) – 1751 {{ill|Ura-Takao-chō|ja|裏高尾町}}, {{ill|Hachiōji, Tokyo|ja|八王子市|lt=Hachiōji City|lt_ja=八王子市}}, {{ill|Tokyo|ja|東京都}}

== Footnotes ==
<references />
*Source: https://web.archive.org/web/20241203020337/https://ja.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E7%9C%9F%E3%81%AE%E9%81%93

== External Links ==
* [https://www.makoto.or.jp/ Makoto no Michi] (official site)

[[Category:Japanese new religions]]
[[Category:Shinto new religious movements]]
[[Category:宗教法人]]
[[Category:世田谷区]]
[[Category:Nasu, Tochigi]]
[[Category:1952年設立の組織]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
