{{出典の明記|date=2018年11月}}
{{日本の氏族
|家名 = Chichibu no Kuni no Miyatsuko
|家紋 =
|家紋名称 =
|本姓 =
|家祖 = {{ill|Chichibuhiko-no-Mikoto|ja|知知夫彦命}}
|種別 = {{ill|Shinbetsu|ja|神別}} ({{ill|Tenjin|ja|天津神・国津神|lt=Tenjin|lt_ja=天神}})
|出身地 =
|根拠地 = Chichibu Province (later the northwestern part of {{ill|Musashi Province|ja|武蔵国}})
|人物 =
|支流 =
}}
'''Chichibu no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''chichibu no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''chichibu kokuzō'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled the region that later became the northwestern part of {{ill|Musashi Province|ja|武蔵国}} ('''[[#Territory|Chichibu Province]]''').

== Overview ==
=== Writing ===
* '''Chichibu no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (知知夫国造)
*: Since the "々" in "知々夫" is a {{ill|iteration mark|ja|々|lt=iteration mark|lt_ja=々}}, this is the writing without that mark.
* '''Chichibu no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (秩父国造)
*: A writing based on the later name of {{ill|Chichibu District|ja|秩父郡}} of {{ill|Musashi Province|ja|武蔵国}}.
* '''Musashi Chichibu no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''
*: The writing in the "{{ill|Tenjin Hongi|ja|天神本紀}}" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}''. [[#Ancestry|See below]].

=== Ancestry ===
The Chichibu no Kuni no Miyatsuko is generally considered a descendant of {{ill|Yagokoro-Omoikane-no-Kami|ja|八意思兼神}}.

* According to the "Tenjin Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'', '''{{ill|Ameno-Shitaharu-no-Mikoto|ja|天下春命}}''', one of the brothers {{ill|Ameno-Uwaharu-no-Mikoto|ja|天表春命}} and {{ill|Ameno-Shitaharu-no-Mikoto|ja|天下春命}}, sons of {{ill|Yagokoro-Omoikane-no-Kami|ja|八意思兼神}} (son of {{ill|Takami-Musubi-no-Mikoto|ja|高皇産霊尊}}), was the ancestor of the Musashi Chichibu no Kuni no Miyatsuko and others.
* According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'', during the era of {{ill|Emperor Sujin|ja|崇神天皇}}, '''{{ill|Chichibuhiko-no-Mikoto|ja|知知夫彦命}}''' (''chichibuhiko no mikoto''), 10th-generation descendant of '''Yagokoro-Omoikane-no-Mikoto''', was appointed the first Chichibu no Kuni no Miyatsuko.
* According to the ''{{ill|Takahashi-uji Bumi|ja|高橋氏文}}'', '''Ameno-Uwabara''' and '''Ameno-Shitabara''', who together with {{ill|Iwaka-Mutsukari-no-Mikoto|ja|磐鹿六獦命}} presented food to {{ill|Emperor Keikō|ja|景行天皇}} (the 12th emperor), were the upper ancestors of the Chichibu no Kuni no Miyatsuko.

=== Clan ===

== Base ==
The base of the kuni no miyatsuko was the later '''{{ill|Chichibu District|ja|秩父郡}}''' of {{ill|Musashi Province|ja|武蔵国}}<ref name="chizu">''[[#chizu|Nihon Rekishi Chizu: Genshi/Kodai-hen Ge]]''.</ref>. The location of the {{ill|gunga|ja|郡衙}} of Chichibu District is unknown, but present-day Nakamura-machi, {{ill|Chichibu, Saitama|ja|秩父市|lt=Chichibu City|lt_ja=秩父市}}, {{ill|Saitama Prefecture|ja|埼玉県}}, where {{ill|Nakamura-gō|ja|中村郷}} of Chichibu District is said to have been, is considered a strong candidate<ref>[http://www.city.chichibu.lg.jp/3983.html History of Chichibu City] - Chichibu City (Retrieved December 26, 2017, 5:08 AM {{ill|Japan Standard Time|ja|日本標準時|lt=JST|lt_ja=日本標準時}})</ref>.

Among municipalities bearing the name "Chichibu" is {{ill|Chichibu, Saitama|ja|秩父市|lt=Chichibu City|lt_ja=秩父市}}.

=== Territory ===
The territory of the Chichibu no Kuni no Miyatsuko was the region then called '''Chichibu Province''' (the {{ill|Chichibu region|ja|秩父地方|lt=Chichibu|lt_ja=秩父}} and {{ill|Kodama District, Saitama|ja|児玉郡|lt=Kodama|lt_ja=児玉郡}} region centered on {{ill|Chichibu Shrine|ja|秩父神社}} (see [[#Tutelary Shrine|Tutelary Shrine]])<ref>[http://www.nihonjiten.com/data/263218.html Chichibu no Kuni no Miyatsuko (Musashi)] - Nihon Jiten (Retrieved February 4, 2018, 2:07 PM {{ill|Japan Standard Time|ja|日本標準時|lt=JST|lt_ja=日本標準時}})</ref>). Chichibu Province refers to the northwestern part of {{ill|Musashi Province|ja|武蔵国}} of the later {{ill|ritsuryō provinces|ja|令制国}}, and is said to be the region centered on the present-day {{ill|Chichibu region|ja|秩父地方}} of {{ill|Saitama Prefecture|ja|埼玉県}}. ''[[#kenshi|Saitama Kenshi. Vol. 2, Nara Heian Era]]'' says that probably the "present-day" ({{ill|1933|ja|1933年}} being the year of publication of that book) areas of {{ill|Chichibu|ja|秩父郡|lt=Chichibu|lt_ja=秩父}}, {{ill|Kodama|ja|児玉郡|lt=Kodama|lt_ja=児玉郡}}, {{ill|Hiki District, Saitama|ja|比企郡|lt=Hiki|lt_ja=比企郡}}, {{ill|Ōsato District, Saitama|ja|大里郡|lt=Ōsato|lt_ja=大里郡}}, and {{ill|Kita-Saitama District|ja|北埼玉郡|lt=Kita-Saitama|lt_ja=北埼玉郡}} are thought to have been within the boundaries of Chichibu Province. ''[[#chizu|Nihon Rekishi Chizu: Genshi/Kodai-hen Ge]]'' assigns it to present-day {{ill|Chichibu District|ja|秩父郡}} and {{ill|Kodama District, Saitama|ja|児玉郡|lt=Kodama District|lt_ja=児玉郡}}.

For the etymology of the place name, see {{ill|Chichibu region#Etymology|ja|秩父地方#語源}}.

That Chichibu was a land developed from ancient times is evident from the fact that, among the kuni no miyatsuko established in the areas that later became part of Musashi Province under the {{ill|ritsuryō system|ja|律令制#日本の律令制|lt=ritsuryō system|lt_ja=令制}}, the Chichibu no Kuni no Miyatsuko was established ahead of the other {{ill|Muzashi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|无邪志国造}} and {{ill|Munasashi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|胸刺国造}}.

Chichibu Province, combined with {{ill|Muzashi Province|ja|无邪志国|lt=Muzashi Province|lt_ja=无邪志国}}, which was ruled by the {{ill|Muzashi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|无邪志国造}}, became the {{ill|ritsuryō province|ja|令制国}} of {{ill|Musashi Province|ja|武蔵国}} in the {{ill|7th century|ja|7世紀}}. Initially, Musashi Province belonged to the {{ill|Tōsandō|ja|東山道}}, but in [[771]] it was transferred to the {{ill|Tōkaidō (region)|ja|東海道|lt=Tōkaidō|lt_ja=東海道}}.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
The {{ill|ujigami|ja|氏神}} of the Chichibu no Kuni no Miyatsuko is '''{{ill|Chichibu Shrine|ja|秩父神社}}''' (''chichibu-jinja''; {{Coord|35|59|51.37|N|139|5|2.86|E|region:JP-11_type:landmark|name=Chichibu Shrine}}), the Fourth Shrine<ref group="Note">See {{ill|Ichi-no-miya|ja|一宮}}.</ref> of {{ill|Musashi Province|ja|武蔵国}} located in {{ill|Chichibu, Saitama|ja|秩父市|lt=Chichibu City|lt_ja=秩父市}} (former Chichibu District), {{ill|Saitama Prefecture|ja|埼玉県}}. According to the "{{ill|Kokuzō Hongi|ja|国造本紀}}" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'', Chichibuhiko-no-Mikoto was appointed kuni no miyatsuko and "worshipped the great deity." This "great deity" is considered to refer to Yagokoro-Omoikane-no-Mikoto, the ancestor of Chichibuhiko-no-Mikoto<ref>''[[#heibon|Nihon Rekishi Chimei Taikei Vol. 11: Place Names of Saitama Prefecture]]''.</ref>, and Chichibu Shrine regards this as the founding of the shrine<ref>[http://www.chichibu-jinja.or.jp/saijin/ Enshrined Deities and Origins] - Chichibu Shrine (Retrieved July 2, 2018, 1:43 PM {{ill|Japan Standard Time|ja|日本標準時|lt=JST|lt_ja=日本標準時}})</ref>. Chichibuhiko-no-Mikoto himself is also presently an enshrined deity of Chichibu Shrine, because {{ill|Chichibu-no-Satenoo|ja|知知夫狭手男}}, 9th-generation descendant of Chichibuhiko-no-Mikoto, is said to have jointly enshrined him during the era of {{ill|Emperor Ingyō|ja|允恭天皇}} ([[412]] - [[453]]).

The enshrined deities of {{ill|Chichibu Shrine|ja|秩父神社}} as of [[2018]] ({{ill|Heisei|ja|平成}} 30) are still {{ill|Yagokoro-Omoikane-no-Mikoto|ja|八意思兼命}}, {{ill|Chichibuhiko-no-Mikoto|ja|知知夫彦命}}, and others.

=== Tombs ===
* '''{{ill|Kunikami-zuka Kofun|ja|国神塚古墳}}'''
*: The {{ill|kofun|ja|古墳}} said to be the burial mound of Chichibuhiko-no-Mikoto. There is a great {{ill|ginkgo tree|ja|イチョウ}} in Kunikami, {{ill|Minano, Saitama|ja|皆野町|lt=Minano Town|lt_ja=皆野町}}, {{ill|Chichibu District|ja|秩父郡}}, Saitama Prefecture, called "'''[http://www.town.minano.saitama.jp/bunkazai/kenshitei/cat103/253/ Kunikami no Ōichō]'''  {{ja icon}}<ref group="Note">The link is within the Minano Town homepage.</ref>," which is designated as a natural monument of Saitama Prefecture. This tree is said to have been planted beside the tomb of Chichibuhiko-no-Mikoto, and several kofun are said to have existed around it in the past<ref>[http://www.town.minano.saitama.jp/bunkazai/kenshitei/cat103/253/ Kunikami no Ōichō] {{ja icon}} - Minano Town Homepage (Retrieved [[2018]] [[February 2|2月2日]], 0:58 PM (afternoon) {{ill|Japan Standard Time|ja|日本標準時|lt=JST|lt_ja=日本標準時}})</ref>.

== Descendants ==

== Footnotes ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
=== Notes ===
{{Reflist|group="Note"}}

=== Citations ===
{{Reflist|2}}

== References ==
* ''Kokushi Daijiten'' ({{ill|Yoshikawa Kōbunkan|ja|吉川弘文館}})
* {{ill|Sakamoto Tarō (historian)|ja|坂本太郎 (歴史学者)|lt=Sakamoto Tarō|lt_ja=坂本太郎}} and {{ill|Hirano Kunio|ja|平野邦雄}}, ''Nihon Kodai Shizoku Jinmei Jiten'' (Yoshikawa Kōbunkan)
* ''Nihon-shi Kōjiten'' ({{ill|Yamakawa Shuppansha|ja|山川出版社}})
* ''Shintō Daijiten'' ({{ill|Rinsen Shoten|ja|臨川書店}})
* {{Cite book|和書|author=|editor={{ill|Saitama Prefecture|ja|埼玉県}}|title=Saitama Kenshi. Vol. 2, Nara Heian Era|url=https://dl.ndl.go.jp/info:ndljp/pid/1049481/24|accessdate=2018-03-01|year=1933|publisher={{ill|Saitama Prefecture|ja|埼玉県}}|isbn=|page=29|chapter=|ref=kenshi}}Link is to the {{ill|National Diet Library Digital Collections|ja|国立国会図書館デジタルコレクション}}, frame 24.
* {{Cite book|和書|author=|editor={{ill|Shibata Jōe|ja|柴田常恵}}, {{ill|Inamura Tangen|ja|稲村坦元}}|title=Saitama Sōsho. Vol. 1|url=https://dl.ndl.go.jp/info:ndljp/pid/1188871/64|accessdate=2018-5-21|year=1929|publisher={{ill|Sanmeisha|ja|三明社}}|isbn=|page=111|chapter=|ref=sousyo}}Link is to the National Diet Library Digital Collections, frame 64.
* ''Kodai Shizoku Keizu Shūsei'' Chūkan, {{ill|Hōga Toshio|ja|宝賀寿男}}, Kodai Shizoku Kenkyūkai, 1986
* {{Cite book|和書|author=|editor={{ill|Kondō Toshitaka|ja|近藤敏喬}}|title=Kodai Gōzoku Keizu Shūran|year=1993|publisher={{ill|Tōkyōdō Shuppan|ja|東京堂出版}}|isbn=4-490-20225-3|chapter=|ref=keizu}}
* {{Cite book|和書|author=Ōta Akira|authorlink=太田亮|editor=|title=Seishi Kakei Daijiten. Vol. 1|url=https://dl.ndl.go.jp/info:ndljp/pid/1130845/275|accessdate=2018-07-01|year=1936|publisher={{ill|Seishi Kakei Daijiten Kankōkai|ja|姓氏家系大辞典刊行会}}|isbn=|page=405|chapter=|ref=seishi}}Link is to the National Diet Library Digital Collections, frame 275.
* {{Cite book|和書|author=Heibonsha Chihō Shiryō Center|editor=|title={{ill|Nihon Rekishi Chimei Taikei|ja|日本歴史地名大系}} Vol. 11: Place Names of {{ill|Saitama Prefecture|ja|埼玉県}}|date=1993-11-15|publisher={{ill|Heibonsha|ja|平凡社}}|isbn=4582490115|page=678|chapter=|ref=heibon}}
* {{Cite book|和書|author=|editor={{ill|Takeuchi Rizō|ja|竹内理三}} et al.|title={{ill|Nihon Rekishi Chizu|ja|日本歴史地図}}: Genshi/Kodai-hen Ge|year=1982|publisher={{ill|Kashiwa Shobō|ja|柏書房}}|isbn=|page=289|chapter=|ref=chizu}}

== See also ==
* {{ill|Kuni no miyatsuko#List of Various Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造#諸国造一覧}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:ちちふのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:日本の歴史関連のスタブ項目]]
[[Category:武蔵国]]
[[Category:秩父氏|*]]
[[Category:埼玉県の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:知々夫国造]]
