'''Iwaki no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''iwaki no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''iwaki kokuzō'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled '''[[#Territory|Iwaki Province]]''' (later the southern part of {{ill|Mutsu Province|ja|陸奥国}} under the {{ill|ritsuryō|ja|律令制|lt=ritsuryō system|lt_ja=律令国}}).

== Overview ==
=== Ancestry ===
* The "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'' states that during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Seimu|ja|成務天皇|lt=Emperor Seimu|lt_ja=成務朝}}, '''{{ill|Takekoro-no-Mikoto|ja|建許呂命|lt=Takekoro-no-Mikoto|lt_ja=建許侶命}}''' was appointed kuni no miyatsuko.
* In the fragment of the ''Mutsu no Kuni Fudoki'' concerning Yatsuki-gō, the name '''Kuni no Miyatsuko Iwaki-hiko''' appears.

=== Clan ===
'''{{ill|Iwaki clan|ja|岩城氏|lt=Iwaki clan|lt_ja=石城氏}}''' (''iwaki-uji''; {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} of {{ill|Atai (kabane)|ja|直 (姓)|lt=Atai|lt_ja=直}}).
The "Kokuzō Hongi" states that "Takekoro-no-Mikoto, a descendant of {{ill|Amatsuhikone-no-Mikoto|ja|天津彦根命}}, was the ancestor of the Iwaki no Kuni no Miyatsuko," and the ''Kojiki'' Emperor Jimmu section states that "{{ill|Kamu-Yai-Mimi-no-Mikoto|ja|神八井耳命}}, son of Emperor Jimmu, was the ancestor of the Ofu-no-Omi, Michinoku Iwaki no Kuni no Miyatsuko, and others."

== Base ==
=== Territory ===
The territory of the kuni no miyatsuko was the region then called '''Iwaki Province''', corresponding to the later '''{{ill|Mutsu Province|ja|陸奥国}} {{ill|Iwaki District|ja|石城郡}}''', equivalent to the area from the {{ill|Iwaki District (Iwaki northern half)|ja|磐前郡|lt=northern half|lt_ja=北半分}} of present-day {{ill|Iwaki, Fukushima|ja|いわき市|lt=Iwaki City|lt_ja=いわき市}} to {{ill|Ōkuma, Fukushima|ja|大熊町|lt=Ōkuma-machi|lt_ja=大熊町}} in the {{ill|Hamadōri|ja|浜通り}} region of present-day {{ill|Fukushima Prefecture|ja|福島県}}.

In the mid-{{ill|7th century|ja|7世紀}}, it merged with the {{ill|Michinoku-Kikuta no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|道奥菊多国造}} (southern neighbor) and the {{ill|Taka no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|高国造}} to form {{ill|Taka Province|ja|多珂国}}. The northern limit of the Iwaki no Kuni no Miyatsuko's territory was "the village of Kuma in {{ill|Iwaki District|ja|石城郡}} of {{ill|Mutsu Province|ja|陸奥国}}" recorded in the ''{{ill|Hitachi no Kuni Fudoki|ja|常陸国風土記}}'', i.e., present-day {{ill|Ōkuma, Fukushima|ja|大熊町|lt=Ōkuma|lt_ja=大熊}} after the Meiji era.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
* '''{{ill|Ōkunitama Shrine (Iwaki)|ja|大國魂神社 (いわき市)|lt=Ōkunitama Shrine|lt_ja=大國魂神社}}''' (''ōkunitama-jinja'')
*: Enshrined at 26 Miyamae, {{ill|Taira-Sugenami|ja|平菅波}}, {{ill|Iwaki, Fukushima|ja|いわき市|lt=Iwaki City|lt_ja=いわき市}}, {{ill|Fukushima Prefecture|ja|福島県}} (Kunitama-gō, Iwaki District).

=== Related Shrines ===
* {{ill|Iwaki Kokuzō Shrine|ja|磐城国造神社}} (''iwaki kokuzō-jinja'')
*: A shrine enshrined in {{ill|Onahama|ja|小名浜}}, Iwaki City. It enshrines {{ill|Takekoro-no-Mikoto|ja|建許呂命}}.

=== Tombs ===
* {{ill|Kabutozuka Kofun (Iwaki)|ja|甲塚古墳 (いわき市)|lt=Kabutozuka Kofun|lt_ja=甲塚古墳}} (''kabutozuka-kofun'')
*: Located 200 m east of Ōkunitama Shrine, this is a {{ill|round kofun|ja|円墳}} 8 m high and 37 m in diameter (a nationally designated {{ill|historic site|ja|史跡}}), said to be the burial place of Takekoro-no-Mikoto.

== Descendants ==
* '''Iwaki-no-Kōri-no-Miyatsuko-be Shikoaka'''
** According to the ''{{ill|Hitachi no Kuni Fudoki|ja|常陸国風土記}}'', in the 9th year of {{ill|Emperor Kōtoku|ja|孝徳天皇}} ([[653]]), together with Iwaki-no-Atai Miyabe of the {{ill|Taka no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|多珂国造}}, he petitioned the eastern provinces' governor-general Takamuku-no-Daibu to divide the district.

* '''Oho-Iwaki-no-Omi Yamagiwa'''
** In {{ill|Jingo-keiun|ja|神護景雲}} 3 ([[769]]), a {{ill|Iwaki District|ja|磐城郡}} resident with the rank of Ge-shō-rokui-jō, he changed his surname from the Hasetsukabe clan (no kabane) that same year.
*** On a wooden tablet thought to date from around {{ill|Ninju|ja|仁寿}} 3 ([[853]]), unearthed at the {{ill|Aratame Ruins|ja|荒田目遺跡}} in {{ill|Iwaki, Fukushima|ja|いわき市|lt=Iwaki City|lt_ja=いわき市}}, the signature '''Dairyō Oho-no-Omi''' appears, along with the names of persons of the Oho clan (kabane presence unclear): '''Ioetsugi''', '''Koenoi-no-Ieyaka''', '''Ōoto-me''', '''Manatari''', and '''Kooki-no-Ashi'''<ref name="Hirakawa Minami">{{Cite journal|和書|author=平川南 |date=1996-02 |url=https://doi.org/10.15024/00000757 |title=里刀自小論 : いわき市荒田目条里遺跡第二号木簡から |journal=国立歴史民俗博物館研究報告 |ISSN=0286-7400 |publisher=国立歴史民俗博物館 |volume=66 |pages=5-24 |doi=10.15024/00000757 |naid=120005748034 |CRID=1390853649019549184}}</ref>.

* '''Oho-Iwaki-no-Omi Mikashigi'''
** On the 26th day of the 7th month of {{ill|Tennō (era)|ja|天応 (日本)|lt=Tennō|lt_ja=天応}} 2 ([[782]]), he was granted the rank of Ge-jū-goi-ge.

* '''Iwaki-no-Omi Sen□'''
** His name appears on an urushi-gami document from the {{ill|Taga Castle|ja|多賀城}} ruins dated "17th day of the 9th month of {{ill|Hōki|ja|宝亀}} 11 ([[780]])"<ref name="Hirakawa Minami"/>.

* '''Iwaki-no-Omi Fujinari'''
On the 23rd day of the 1st month of {{ill|Tenchō|ja|天長}} 3 ([[826]]), Fujinari, who held Ge-shō-rokui-jō, was granted Ge-jū-goi-ge.
* '''Iwaki-no-Omi Takekimi''', '''Iwaki-no-Omi Sadamichi''', '''Iwaki-no-Omi Otonari''', '''Iwaki-no-Omi Akio'''
** According to the entry for the 8th day of the 1st month of {{ill|Jōwa (Japan)|ja|承和 (日本)|lt=Jōwa|lt_ja=承和}} 11 (840) in the ''{{ill|Shoku Nihon Kōki|ja|続日本後紀}}'', Takekimi was the Iwaki District {{ill|gunji|ja|郡司|lt=Dairyō|lt_ja=大領}} with the rank of {{ill|Ge-jū-goi-ge|ja|冠位・位階制度の変遷#大宝令における位階制|lt=Ge-jū-goi-ge|lt_ja=外従五位下}}, and was granted the surname '''Abe Iwaki-no-Omi'''.

== Footnotes ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
{{Reflist}}

== See also ==
* {{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}
* {{ill|Iwaki Province (718)|ja|石城国|lt=Iwaki Province|lt_ja=石城国}}: {{ill|Ritsuryō province|ja|令制国}} established in 718. Abolished in the 720s and incorporated into {{ill|Mutsu Province|ja|陸奥国}}.
* {{ill|Iwaki District (ancient)|ja|石城郡|lt=Iwaki District|lt_ja=石城郡}} (Iwaki-no-Kōri, Iwaki-no-Kōri)
* {{ill|Iwaki District (Mutsu)|ja|磐城郡|lt=Iwaki District|lt_ja=磐城郡}}
* {{ill|Mutsu Province|ja|陸奥国}}
* {{ill|Michinoku-Kikuta no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|道奥菊多国造}}　{{ill|Kikuta District|ja|菊多郡}}
* {{ill|Taka no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|高国造}}　{{ill|Taga District|ja|多賀郡}}
* {{ill|Taka Province|ja|多珂国}}
* {{ill|Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant|ja|福島第一原子力発電所}}: Located in the northern-limit "village of Kuma."
* {{ill|Iwaki Yumoto Onsen|ja|いわき湯本温泉}}: Located near the southern-limit "Yumoto Keisei."

{{DEFAULTSORT:いわきのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:阿倍氏]]
[[Category:陸奥国]]
[[Category:福島県の歴史]]
[[Category:浜通り]]
[[Category:日本の歴史関連のスタブ項目]]
{{Japanese-history-stub}}
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:石城国造]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
