{{Location map|Japan Mapplot|coordinates={{Coord|37.29|140.12}}|caption=Iwase Kokuzō Shrine|width=256}}

'''Iwase no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''iwase no kuni no miyatsuko'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled '''{{ill|Iwase Province|ja|石背国}}''', said to have been located in {{ill|Iwase District|ja|石背郡}} (''iwase no kōri'') of {{ill|Mutsu Province|ja|陸奥国}} in the {{ill|ritsuryō system|ja|令制国|lt=ritsuryō provinces|lt_ja=令制国}}, corresponding to the present-day Iwase area of {{ill|Sukagawa, Fukushima|ja|須賀川市|lt=Sukagawa City|lt_ja=須賀川市}}, {{ill|Fukushima Prefecture|ja|福島県}}.

== Overview ==
=== Ancestry ===
* According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'', during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Seimu|ja|成務天皇|lt=Emperor Seimu|lt_ja=成務朝}}, '''Takemiyorime-no-Mikoto''' (''takemiyorime no mikoto''), son of {{ill|Takekoro-no-Mikoto|ja|建許侶命}}, was appointed kuni no miyatsuko.

=== Clan ===
'''{{ill|Kimikobe clan|ja|吉弥侯部|lt=Kimikobe clan|lt_ja=吉弥侯部氏}}''' (''kimikobe-uji''; possibly no kabane). The ''{{ill|Nihon Sandai Jitsuroku|ja|日本三代実録}}'' records that in {{ill|Jōgan (Japan)|ja|貞観 (日本)|lt=Jōgan|lt_ja=貞観}} 5 ([[863]]), Kimikobe-no-Toyono was granted the surname '''Mutsu Iwase-no-Asomi'''.

== Tutelary Shrine, etc. ==
* Otakiya Shrine (''otakiya-jinja'') – Said to originate from a small shrine that Takemiyorime-no-Mikoto himself enshrined. It enshrines the ancestor Takekoro-no-Mikoto and Takemiyorime-no-Mikoto. The shrine's name derives from Takemiyorime-no-Mikoto cooking the new grain and offering it before the deity. It is enshrined in Shinmachi, Sukagawa City, north of the {{ill|Sukagawa Interchange|ja|須賀川インターチェンジ}} on the {{ill|Tōhoku Expressway|ja|東北自動車道}}. The same-named shrine located at 45-1 Suwamachi, Sukagawa City, east of the {{ill|Tōhoku Main Line|ja|東北本線}}, is a new shrine after being transferred to Suwamachi, and also enshrines {{ill|Takeminakata-no-Mikoto|ja|建御名方命}}, invited by {{ill|Nikaidō Tameuji|ja|二階堂為氏}} from {{ill|Suwa Taisha|ja|諏訪大社}} in {{ill|Shinano Province|ja|信濃国}}.
* Iwase Kokuzō Shrine (''iwase kokuzō-jinja'') – Enshrines Takemiyorime-no-Mikoto, and descendants of the kuni no miyatsuko are said to have hereditarily held the priesthood<ref>Naganuma Town Board of Education, ''Naganuma-machi no Densetsu'', [http://www.db.fks.ed.jp/txt/10020.003/html/00095.html p.95]</ref>. Enshrined at 37 Naganuma-Toyomachi, Sukagawa City, Fukushima Prefecture.
* Shirakata Shrine – Said to have been invited from {{ill|Hiraoka Shrine|ja|枚岡神社}} in {{ill|Kawachi Province|ja|河内国}} by Takemiyorime-no-Mikoto. Enshrined at 245 Aza-Machiuchi, Imaizumi, Sukagawa City, Fukushima Prefecture. The Yoshida family, descendants of the Iwase no Kuni no Miyatsuko, served as hereditary priests and transmit the "Iwase Kokuzō Keizu."

== Footnotes ==
{{Reflist}}

== See also ==
* {{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}
* {{ill|Naganuma, Fukushima|ja|長沼町 (福島県)|lt=Naganuma|lt_ja=長沼町}}
* {{ill|Naganuma Castle (Mutsu)|ja|長沼城 (陸奥国)|lt=Naganuma Castle|lt_ja=長沼城}}
* {{ill|Takekoro-no-Mikoto|ja|建許呂命}}
* {{ill|Hokotsuki Shrine|ja|桙衝神社}}

== External Links ==
・[http://www.komainu.org/fukusima/sukagawasi/iwasekokuzou/iwakokuzou.html Iwase Kokuzō Shrine]

・[http://is2.sss.fukushima-u.ac.jp/fks-db/txt/10020.003/html/00091.html Naganuma no Densetsu]

{{DEFAULTSORT:いわせのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:陸奥国]]
[[Category:福島県の歴史]]
{{Japanese-history-stub}}
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:石背国造]]
