{{基礎情報 公家
| 氏名 = Kamu-Ōne-no-Mikoto
| 画像 =
| 画像サイズ =
| 画像説明 =
| 時代 = {{ill|Yayoi period|ja|弥生時代}}, {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代}}
| 生誕 = Unknown
| 死没 = Unknown
| 改名 =
| 別名 = Ōne-no-Miko, Kamu-hone, Yatsuri-no-Iri-Hiko-no-Miko, Yatsuri-no-Mikoto
| 諡号 =
| 神号 =
| 戒名 =
| 墓所 = {{ill|Sōkei-Ōzuka Kofun|ja|宗慶大塚古墳}} theory exists
| 官位 = First {{ill|Motosu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|本巣国造}} ({{ill|Minozen no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|三野前国造}}, Mino no Kuni no Miyatsuko)
| 主君 = {{ill|Emperor Kaika|ja|開化天皇}}
| 氏族 = Ancestor of the {{ill|Mino clan|ja|美濃氏|lt=Mino-no-Atai|lt_ja=美濃直}}
| 父母 = Father: {{ill|Hikoimasu-no-Ōkimi|ja|日子坐王}}, Mother: Okinaga-no-Mizuyori-hime
| 兄弟 = Mizuho-no-Mawaka-no-Ōkimi, Mizuho-no-Iori-yori-hime, Miitsu-hime
| 妻   =
| 子   = Eldest daughter (Eto-ko), Younger daughter (Oto-ko)
| 特記事項 =
}}
'''Kamu-Ōne-no-Miko''' (''kamu-ōne-no-miko''; {{ill|dates of birth and death unknown|ja|生没年不詳}}) was a {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代}} figure and the first '''{{ill|Motosu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|本巣国造}}''' ('''{{ill|Minozen no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|三野前国造}}''', Mino no Kuni no Miyatsuko).

== Overview ==
The ''{{ill|Kojiki|ja|古事記}}'' transmits his alternative name as '''Yatsuri-no-Iri-Hiko-no-Miko''' (''yatsuri no iri hiko no miko''); the {{ill|Emperor Kaika|ja|開化天皇}} section makes him the ancestor of the {{ill|Motosu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|本巣国造|lt=Mino no Kuni no Motosu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|lt_ja=三野国之本巣国造}} and the Nagahatabe-no-Muraji; the {{ill|Emperor Keikō|ja|景行天皇}} section has '''Ōne-no-Miko''' as the ancestor of the {{ill|Mino no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|美濃国造}}. The ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'' records it almost the same as the ''Kojiki'', and in the Emperor Keikō section '''Kamu-hone''' (''kamu-hone'') is made the Mino no Kuni no Miyatsuko. Meanwhile, the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'' has '''Yatsuri-no-Mikoto''' appointed {{ill|Minozen no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|三野前国造}} in the {{ill|Emperor Kaika|ja|開化天皇|lt=Emperor Kaika|lt_ja=開化朝}} court, and based on the descriptions in these three texts, the Mino no Kuni no Motosu no Kuni no Miyatsuko and the Minozen no Kuni no Miyatsuko are considered the same kuni no miyatsuko<ref>"Ancient and Medieval, Chapter 1: The Kamo Region in the Pre-Taika Era, Section 3: Kuni no Miyatsuko and Agatanushi," ''Minokamo Shishi Tsūshi-hen'', {{ill|Minokamo, Gifu|ja|美濃加茂市}}, 1980, p. 202.</ref><ref>"Chapter 6: The Pre-Taika Era, Section 2: Kuni no Miyatsuko and Agatanushi," ''Kakamigahara Shishi Tsūshi-hen: Nature, Primitive, Ancient, Medieval'', Kakamigahara Board of Education, 1986, pp. 181-184.</ref><ref>{{ill|Hōga Toshio|ja|宝賀寿男}}, "The Branching and Activities of the Minozen no Kuni no Miyatsuko and Others," ''Kodai Shizoku no Kenkyū 18: Kamo-shi, Hattori-shi — Descendants of Sukunabikona-no-kami'', Aogaki Shuppan, 2021, pp. 81, 82.</ref>. There is also a theory that the name Kamu-Ōne-no-Miko means "Kamo-no-Ōne"<ref name="kamo">Hōga Toshio, "The Branching and Activities of the Minozen no Kuni no Miyatsuko and Others," ''Kodai Shizoku no Kenkyū 18: Kamo-shi, Hattori-shi — Descendants of Sukunabikona-no-kami'', Aogaki Shuppan, 2021, pp. 86, 87.</ref> ([[#Genealogy|see below]]).

The {{ill|Sōkei-Ōzuka Kofun|ja|宗慶大塚古墳}} in Sōkei, {{ill|Motosu, Gifu|ja|本巣市}}, Gifu Prefecture, is said to be the tomb of Kamu-Ōne-no-Miko or his descendants, and its construction period dates back to the early {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代}} ({{ill|4th century|ja|4世紀}}). For this reason, it has long been called Ōzuka Kofun.

In addition to being enshrined at the {{ill|Takasaka Shrine|ja|高坂神社}} and the {{ill|Iwanonishi Shrine|ja|伊波乃西神社}}, he appears in the founding traditions of several shrines. At the {{ill|Kamo Shrine|ja|加毛神社}}, Kamu-Ōne-no-Miko, son of Kamo-no-Kimi-Hikoimasu-no-Ōkimi, became the Mino no Kuni no Miyatsuko, and his descendants flourished in the southwestern Mino region, so the pioneers are said to have enshrined the Kamo clan ancestral deity {{ill|Kamo-Wake-Ikazuchi-no-Mikoto|ja|賀茂別雷命|lt=Kami-Wake-Ikazuchi-no-Mikoto|lt_ja=神別雷命}}<ref>"[https://www.gifu-jinjacho.jp/syosai.php?shrno=64&shrname=%E2%98%85%E5%8A%A0%E6%AF%9B%E7%A5%9E%E7%A4%BE%E2%98%85 Kamo Shrine]," Gifu Prefecture Shrine Agency Official Website.</ref>.

== Genealogy ==
His father was {{ill|Hikoimasu-no-Ōkimi|ja|日子坐王}}, a son of {{ill|Emperor Kaika|ja|開化天皇}}; his mother was said to be {{ill|Okinaga-no-Mizuyori-hime|ja|息長水依比売}}, daughter of {{ill|Ame-no-Mikage-no-Mikoto|ja|天御影命}}; and his full siblings are said to include Mizuho-no-Mawaka-no-Ōkimi, ancestor of the {{ill|An no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|安国造}}, Mizuho-no-Iori-yori-hime, and Miitsu-hime. However, the "Kokuzō Hongi" records him as being appointed kuni no miyatsuko in the Kaika court, which contradicts the ''Kojiki'' genealogy in terms of era.

== Footnotes ==
{{Reflist}}

== See also ==
*{{ill|List of Figures from before the Asuka Period|ja|飛鳥時代以前の人物一覧}}
*{{ill|Kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:かむおおねのみこ}}
[[Category:古代日本の人物]]
[[Category:古墳時代の人物]]
[[Category:美濃国の人物]]
[[Category:岐阜県の歴史]]
[[Category:生没年不詳]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:神大根王]]