{{日本の氏族
|家名 = Ho no Kuni no Miyatsuko
|家紋 = <!-- 家紋の画像 -->
|家紋名称 =
|本姓 = Ho-Wake-no-Kimi
|家祖 = {{ill|Mikado-Wake-no-Ōkimi|ja|朝廷別王}}
|種別 = {{ill|Kōbetsu|ja|皇別}}
|出身地 = {{ill|Ōyamato Province|ja|大和国|lt=Ōyamato Province|lt_ja=大倭国}}
|根拠地 = {{ill|Ho Province|ja|穂国}} (later Mikawa Province)
|人物 = See [[#People|People]]
|支流 = {{ill|Tajima no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|但遅麻国造}}, {{ill|Kusakabe clan|ja|日下部氏}}
}}
'''Ho no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''ho no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''ho kokuzō'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled {{ill|Ho Province|ja|穂国}} (the eastern part of '''{{ill|Mikawa Province|ja|三河国}}''', i.e. {{ill|eastern Mikawa|ja|東三河}}).

== Overview ==
=== Name ===
The ''{{ill|Kojiki|ja|古事記}}'' writes it as '''Ho-Wake-no-Kimi''' (''ho no wake no kimi''); the "Tenson Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'' has '''Mikawa-Ho no Kuni no Miyatsuko''', and the "Kokuzō Hongi" has '''Ho no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''.

=== Ancestry ===
*In the ''Kojiki'', '''{{ill|Mikado-Wake-no-Ōkimi|ja|朝廷別王}}''', son of {{ill|Tanba-no-Michinushi-no-Ōkimi|ja|丹波道主王|lt=Tanba-Hiko-Tatasu-Michinoushi-no-Ōkimi|lt_ja=丹波比古多多須美知能宇斯王}}, is given as the ancestor of the Ho-Wake-no-Kimi.
*The "Tenson Hongi" of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'' transmits that '''{{ill|Unakami-no-Sukune|ja|菟上足尼}}''', 4th-generation descendant of {{ill|Katsuragi-no-Sotsuhiko|ja|葛城襲津彦}}, was appointed Ho no Kuni no Miyatsuko.

=== Clan ===
Clan surname and kabane unknown.

According to the ''Toyohashi Shishi'', the beginning of the Ho no Kuni no Miyatsuko is said to be where the ''{{ill|Kojiki|ja|古事記}}'' Emperor Kaika entry writes that {{ill|Mikado-Wake-no-Ōkimi|ja|朝廷別王}} (son of {{ill|Tanba-no-Michinushi-no-Ōkimi|ja|丹波道主王}})<ref name="toyo">Toyohashi Shishi Henshū Iinkai (ed.), ''Toyohashi Shishi'' Vol. 1, Toyohashi City, 1960.</ref> "is the ancestor of the Ho-Wake of Mikawa"{{efn|Note, however, that the description here is only "Wake of Ho" and not "Kuni no Miyatsuko of Ho."}}. One theory states that Tanba-no-Michinushi-no-Ōkimi's son entered Ho Province during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Keikō|ja|景行天皇}}<ref name="toyo"/>. Also, since the Ho no Kuni no Miyatsuko entry in ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'' Volume 10 "{{ill|Kokuzō Hongi|ja|国造本紀}}" says that during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Yūryaku|ja|雄略天皇}}, Unakami-no-Sukune (''unakami no sukune''), 4th-generation descendant of {{ill|Katsuragi-no-Sotsuhiko|ja|葛城襲津彦}}, was appointed Ho no Kuni no Miyatsuko, there is a theory that the kuni no miyatsuko lineage changed<ref name="toyo"/>.

On a wooden tablet excavated from the {{ill|Ishigami site|ja|石神遺跡}} in {{ill|Asuka, Nara|ja|明日香村}} in {{ill|Nara Prefecture|ja|奈良県}}, considered to date to the latter half of the {{ill|7th century|ja|7世紀}} under the {{ill|hyō|ja|評}} system and the oldest historical source regarding the establishment of Hōi District, it reads "Mikawa-Ho-hyō-Ho-sato-Ho-A-sa," interpreted as the personal name "Mikawa (Province) Ho-{{ill|hyō|ja|評}} (ho no kōri) Ho-sato (ho no sato) Ho-be-Suke (hobe no tasuku)." It shows the existence of the place name "Ho-no-sato" and is considered a useful source for researching the existence of the Ho no Kuni no Miyatsuko<ref name="sinbun">''Chūnichi Shimbun'', 8 February 2005.</ref>.

Though the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'' is considered a {{ill|forgery|ja|偽書}} written in the {{ill|Heian period|ja|平安時代}}, the forged part is only the preface, and the historical value of "Kokuzō Hongi" and similar sources is recognized<ref>Shinno Naokichi (''Sekai Daihyakka Jiten dai-2-han'', Heibonsha); Saeki Arikiyo (''Nihon Daihyakka Zensho'', Shogakukan).</ref><ref>{{ill|Ueda Masaaki|ja|上田正昭}}, {{ill|Kamata Jun'ichi|ja|鎌田純一}}, ''Nihon no Kamigami: "Sendai Kuji Hongi" no Fukken'', Daiwa Shobō, 2004.</ref><ref>{{ill|Arashi Yoshihito|ja|嵐義人}}, "The Formation, Compiler, and Editorial Intent of the 'Sendai Kuji Hongi'," ''Rekishi Tokuhon'' November 2008 issue, Shinjinbutsu Ōraisha, 2008.</ref><ref>{{ill|Kamata Jun'ichi|ja|鎌田純一}}, ''Sendai Kuji Hongi no Kenkyū: Research Section'', Yoshikawa Kōbunkan, 1962.</ref><ref>{{ill|Ko Sōmasami|ja|古相正美}}, "Authenticity of the 'Preface': The Mystery of Shōtoku Taishi's Selection and Compilation," ''Rekishi Tokuhon'' November 2008 issue, Shinjinbutsu Ōraisha, 2008.</ref><ref>{{ill|Watanabe Takashi|ja|渡邉卓}}, "History of the Theory that 'Sendai Kuji Hongi' is a Forgery," ''Rekishi Tokuhon'' December 2008 issue, Shinjinbutsu Ōraisha, 2008.</ref><ref>{{ill|Itō Ken|ja|伊藤剣}}, {{ill|Kudō Hiroshi|ja|工藤浩}}, {{ill|Matsumoto Hiroki|ja|松本弘毅}}, Watanabe Takashi, "'Sendai Kuji Hongi' Research History [Bibliographic Commentary]," ''Rekishi Tokuhon'' December 2008 issue, Shinjinbutsu Ōraisha, 2008.</ref>. However, the source in question also contains later interpolations and confusions, so caution is needed when treating it as a source. Therefore, as discussed above, due to confusion in the kuni no miyatsuko genealogies, there are reliability problems with the establishment time of the Ho no Kuni no Miyatsuko given in the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi''. Indeed, in the ''Kojiki'' the kuni no miyatsuko were established during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Seimu|ja|成務天皇}}, and there is no description of the kuni no miyatsuko during the reign of Emperor Yūryaku.

Furthermore, only the existence of the kuni no miyatsuko — the office name — can be confirmed, and much remains unclear regarding the establishment period and the exact ruling territory<ref name="sinbun"/>.

At the {{ill|Miyaji-Tenjin Shrine|ja|宮道天神社}} in {{ill|Toyokawa, Aichi|ja|豊川市}}, {{ill|Aichi Prefecture|ja|愛知県}}, there is a tradition that Miyaji-no-Sukune-Hayamaro, son of {{ill|Takekaiko-no-Mikoto|ja|建貝児王}} and grandson of {{ill|Yamato Takeru|ja|日本武尊}}, became '''Ho-no-Agata-nushi''', and his descendants enshrined Takekaiko-no-Mikoto, which became the Miyaji-Tenjin Shrine<ref>"[https://www.toyokawa-map.net/spot/000099.html Miyaji-Tenjin Shrine]," ''Welcome to Toyokawa City'', Toyokawa Tourism Association.</ref>.

== Base ==
In the {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代}}, they were based in the {{ill|Toyokawa River|ja|豊川}} basin of eastern {{ill|Mikawa|ja|三河国|lt=Mikawa|lt_ja=三河}}, mainly around {{ill|Hōi District|ja|宝飯郡}}<ref name=宝賀寿男2016/>.

=== Territory ===
The territory of the kuni no miyatsuko was the region then called '''Ho Province''', corresponding to the later {{ill|ritsuryō province|ja|律令国}} '''{{ill|Hōi District|ja|宝飯郡}}''' of {{ill|Mikawa Province|ja|三河国}} ('''Ho-hyō'''){{efn|By the {{ill|Kōji Nijirei|ja|好字二字令}} of {{ill|713|ja|713年}}, "Ho" came to be recorded as Hōō (宝飫), later as Hōi (''Ho-no-Kuni Genshi-kō'').}} (including {{ill|Shitara District|ja|設楽郡}}, later split off), {{ill|Yana District|ja|八名郡}}{{efn|No hyō-system wooden tablets have been excavated here to the present.}}, and part of {{ill|Atsumi District|ja|渥美郡}} (Akumi-hyō), to the basin of the {{ill|Umeda River (Aichi)|ja|梅田川 (愛知県)|lt=Umeda River|lt_ja=梅田川}} in the base part of the {{ill|Atsumi Peninsula|ja|渥美半島}} — this is considered the most likely range of the ruling territory<ref>{{Cite journal|和書|author=鈴木源一郎 |date=2000 |title=穂国と国造時代の神々 |journal=愛知大学綜合郷土研究所紀要 |ISSN=04008359 |publisher=愛知大学綜合郷土研究所 |issue=45 |pages=143-155 |id={{CRID|1520853834914502272}} |url=https://ndlsearch.ndl.go.jp/books/R000000004-I5461173}}</ref>. Also, Atsumi District Isobe-gō is thought to be related to the kuni no miyatsuko family<ref name=宝賀寿男2016/>. There is also a theory that the entire eastern Mikawa was Ho Province<ref name="toyo"/>. However, ''Taijingū Shozōji-ki'' Volume 1 states "In Emperor Suinin's 140th year of life, the Mikawa no Kuni no Miyatsuko donated the Atsumi-Kanbe of Atsumi District," so Atsumi District may have been under the rule of the {{ill|Mikawa no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|三河国造}}.

After the {{ill|Taika Reform|ja|大化の改新}}, the territories of the Ho no Kuni no Miyatsuko and the Mikawa no Kuni no Miyatsuko were combined, and Mikawa Province (Mikawa Province) was established<ref>{{Cite book|和書|author=三鬼清一郎 |author-link=三鬼清一郎 |title=愛知県の歴史 |publisher=山川出版社 |year=2001 |edition=新版 |series=県史 |NCID=BA50131274 |ISBN=4634322307 |id={{全国書誌番号|20148617}} |ref=harv}}</ref>.

== Establishment Period ==
According to the Kokuzō Hongi, whereas many kuni no miyatsuko such as the {{ill|Mikawa no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|三河国造}}, {{ill|Tōtsuōmi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|遠淡海国造}}, and {{ill|Owari no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|尾張国造}} were appointed in the reign of Emperor Seimu, the Ho no Kuni no Miyatsuko was appointed much later during the reign of Emperor Yūryaku. On the other hand, according to Volume 5 "Tenson Hongi" of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'', {{ill|Mononobe-no-Ikui-no-Sukune|ja|物部胆咋|lt=Mononobe-no-Ikui-no-Sukune|lt_ja=物部胆咋}} (''mononobe no ikui no sukune'') of the Seimu court married Isahime (''isahime''), younger sister of Mikoto-no-Atai (''mikoto no atai'') of the Mikawa-Ho no Kuni no Miyatsuko.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
Probably '''{{ill|Toga Shrine|ja|砥鹿神社}}''', the {{ill|ichi-no-miya|ja|一宮}} of {{ill|Mikawa Province|ja|三河国}}. According to shrine tradition, the shake Kusakato clan is descended from Ho-Wake-no-Mikoto; this family is considered a descendant of the {{ill|Kusakabe clan|ja|日下部氏|lt=Kusakabe-no-Muraji|lt_ja=日下部連}}, of the same lineage as Ho-Wake-no-Mikoto, and the shrine is presumed to have been enshrined by the Ho no Kuni no Miyatsuko<ref>{{ill|Tanigawa Ken'ichi|ja|谷川健一}}, "Toga Shrine," ''Nihon no Kamigami: Jinja to Seichi'' Vol. 10 Tōkai, {{ill|Hakusuisha|ja|白水社}}, Shōwa 62.</ref>. The ''Mikawa no Kuni Ichinomiya Toga Jinja Shi'' also lists Mikado-Wake-no-Ōkimi among the enshrined deities.

=== Related Shrines ===
*'''{{ill|Tamikawazu Shrine|ja|多美河津神社}}''' (''tamikawazu jinja'')
*:A shrine located in Shuku-chō Miyawaki, {{ill|Toyokawa, Aichi|ja|豊川市}}, {{ill|Aichi Prefecture|ja|愛知県}}, enshrining Mikado-Wake-no-Ōkimi.
*'''{{ill|Katahara Shrine|ja|形原神社}}''' (''katahara jinja'')
*:A {{ill|Engishiki-listed shrine|ja|式内社}} located in {{ill|Katahara-chō|ja|形原町}}, {{ill|Gamagōri, Aichi|ja|蒲郡市}} in Aichi Prefecture, enshrining Mikado-Wake-no-Mikoto.

=== Tombs ===
*'''{{ill|Danjō Kofun No. 10|ja|断上10号墳}}''' (''danjō jūgō fun'')
*:A 50-meter-long {{ill|keyhole-shaped kofun (rectangle)|ja|前方後方墳}} in Takehiro, {{ill|Shinshiro, Aichi|ja|新城市}}.
*'''{{ill|Ichikishima Shrine Kofun|ja|市杵島神社古墳}}''' (''ichikishima jinja kofun'')
*:A 55-meter-long keyhole-shaped kofun (rectangle) in Muroichibachō, {{ill|Toyohashi, Aichi|ja|豊橋市}}; double-rimmed jars were excavated.
*'''{{ill|Funayama Kofun No. 1 (Toyokawa)|ja|船山1号墳 (豊川市)|lt=Funayama Kofun No. 1|lt_ja=船山1号墳}}''' (''funayama ichigō fun'')
*:A 95-meter-long {{ill|keyhole-shaped kofun|ja|前方後円墳}} in Hachiman-chō, Toyokawa City; built in the late {{ill|5th century|ja|5世紀}}, there is a theory that it is the tomb of Unakami-no-Sukune<ref>''Aichi Kenshi Tsūshi Hen 1 Genshi/Kodai'', 2016, pp. 192-193.</ref>.
*'''{{ill|Magoshi-Nagahizuka Kofun|ja|馬越長火塚古墳}}''' (''magoshi-nagahizuka kofun'')
*:A 70-meter-long keyhole-shaped kofun in Ishimaki-hon-chō, Toyohashi City, built in the late Kofun period. Surrounded by several keyhole-shaped kofun, keyhole-shaped kofun (rectangle), and round kofun.

== Footnotes ==
=== Notes ===
<references group="注釈" />
=== Citations ===
{{reflist|refs=
<ref name=宝賀寿男2016>{{ill|Hōga Toshio|ja|宝賀寿男}}, "[http://wwr2.ucom.ne.jp/hetoyc15/keihu/kaikokuso/kaikok2.htm Continuation of 'The Genealogy and Family of the Kai no Kuni no Miyatsuko']," ''Koju Kinobōma'', 2016.</ref>
}}

==References==
* {{Cite book|和書|author=豊橋市 |title=豊橋市史 |publisher=豊橋市役所 |year=1960 |NCID=BN05431446 |id={{全国書誌番号|68001395}} |doi=10.11501/3010589 |url=https://dl.ndl.go.jp/pid/3010589/1/1 |ref=harv}}

== See also ==
*{{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}
*{{ill|Kusakabe clan|ja|日下部氏}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:ほのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:三河国]]
[[Category:豊橋市の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:穂国造]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
