{{nihongo|'''Awa no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''|粟国造|''awa no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''awa kokuzō''}} was a [[kuni no miyatsuko]] who ruled the northern portion of [[Awa Province (Tokushima)|Awa Province]] under the later {{ill|ritsuryō provinces|ja|令制国}}, corresponding to the northern part of modern [[Tokushima Prefecture]].

According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the {{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}, during the reign of [[Emperor Ōjin]], Chiha-no-Sukune, a 9th-generation descendant of {{ill|Takamimusubi|ja|タカミムスビ|lt=Takamimusubi-no-Mikoto|lt_ja=高皇産霊尊}}, was appointed kuni no miyatsuko.<ref>''Kokushi Taikei'', vol. 7, ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'', p. 153.</ref>

The name "Awa" is said to derive from the large quantity of {{ill|foxtail millet|ja|アワ|lt=awa}} produced in the area. Because modern Tokushima Prefecture is largely {{ill|mountainous|ja|山地}} and early [[agriculture]] was constrained by {{ill|terrain|ja|地形}}, it is thought to have emphasized {{ill|dry-field farming|ja|畑作}}. {{ill|Nakaōji Shrine|ja|中王子神社}} at {{ill|Ishii, Tokushima|ja|石井町|lt=Ishii-chō}}, {{ill|Myōzai District|ja|名西郡}}, contains the {{ill|Awa no Kuni no Miyatsuko Tomb Stele|ja|阿波国造墓碑}}, and the kuni no miyatsuko lineage is thought to be the Awa-no-Ōshi-no-Atai clan. In general, kuni no miyatsuko of the Ōshi-no-Atai kabane ruled wider areas than those of the Atai kabane, and are thought to have held territories on a scale that would be inherited by ritsuryō provinces; the territory of the Awa no Kuni no Miyatsuko just before the {{ill|ritsuryō|ja|律令制}} system is believed to have been the area that was directly inherited by the ritsuryō "Awa Province".<ref>''Kadokawa Nihon Chimei Daijiten (Tokushima-ken)'', pp. 26–27.</ref>

== Citations ==
{{Reflist}}

== References ==
* Kuroita Katsumi et al. (eds.), ''Kojiki, Sendai Kuji Hongi, Shintō Gobusho'' (''Shinteizōho Kokushi Taikei'' vol. 7), Yoshikawa Kōbunkan, 1966.
* Kadokawa Nihon Chimei Daijiten Hensan Iinkai (ed.), ''Kadokawa Nihon Chimei Daijiten (Tokushima-ken)'', Kadokawa Shoten, 1986.

{{Japanese-history-stub}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:あわのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:阿波国]]
[[Category:徳島県の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:粟国造]]
