{{日本の氏族
|家名 = Suga no Kuni no Miyatsuko
|家紋 = <!-- 家紋の画像 -->
|家紋名称 =
|本姓 = Unknown
|家祖 = {{ill|Umashiini-no-Mikoto|ja|美志印命}}
|種別 = {{ill|Shinbetsu|ja|神別}} ({{ill|Tenson|ja|天孫}})
|出身地 = {{ill|Izumo Province|ja|出雲国}} or {{ill|Ise Province|ja|伊勢国}}
|根拠地 = Suga Province (later the eastern part of {{ill|Tōtōmi Province|ja|遠江国}})
|人物 = See [[#People|People]]
|支流 =
}}
'''Suga no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''suga no kuni no miyatsuko'' / ''suka no kuni no miyatsuko'' / ''soga no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''suga kokuzō'' / ''suka kokuzō'' / ''soga kokuzō'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled [[#Territory|Suga Province]] (the eastern part of Tōtōmi Province).

== Overview ==
=== Name ===
The "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'' writes it as '''Suga no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''.

=== Ancestry ===
*According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'', '''{{ill|Umashiini-no-Mikoto|ja|美志印命}}''' (''umashiini-no-mikoto'', ''mishiini-no-mikoto'') was appointed kuni no miyatsuko because he followed {{ill|Emperor Jinmu|ja|神武天皇}} when he pacified the realm<ref>"Kokuzō Hongi, Suga no Kuni no Miyatsuko entry," ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'' Vol. 10.</ref>.
*There is also a theory that Umashiini-no-Mikoto was a descendant of {{ill|Nigihayahi-no-Mikoto|ja|饒速日命}}<ref name="suga">{{ill|Ōta Akira|ja|太田亮}}, "Suga," ''Seishi Kakei Daijiten'' Vol. 3, Kokumin-sha, 1943, p. 3002.</ref>.

=== Clan ===
Both the surname and kabane are unknown.

== Base ==
The base of the kuni no miyatsuko is said to be '''{{ill|Soga Village (Shizuoka)|ja|曽我村 (静岡県)|lt=Soga|lt_ja=曽我}}''' in the later {{ill|Sano District|ja|佐野郡}} of {{ill|Tōtōmi Province|ja|遠江国}}, with a theory identifying it as Soga in present-day {{ill|Kakegawa, Shizuoka|ja|掛川市|lt=Kakegawa|lt_ja=掛川市}} in {{ill|Shizuoka Prefecture|ja|静岡県}}<ref name="shizuoka">{{ill|Shimonaka Makoto|ja|下中真人}}, "Sano District," ''Shizuoka Prefecture Place Names, Nihon Rekishi Chimei Taikei 22'', {{ill|Heibonsha|ja|平凡社}}, 2000.</ref>. A connection with '''{{ill|Ōsuka Town|ja|大須賀町}}''' and '''Yokosuka''' in Kakegawa City is also considered. The place name Soga does not appear in historical sources such as the ''{{ill|Wamyō Ruijushō|ja|和名類聚抄}}'', but there is a theory that because the region disappeared early, the name was only retained as a single village name<ref name="suga"/>.

=== Territory ===
The territory of the Suga no Kuni no Miyatsuko was the area then called '''Suga Province''', and there is a theory that it ruled the later Sano District (Kakegawa City) area. The neighboring {{ill|Kunu Village|ja|久努村}} of {{ill|Yamana District|ja|山名郡}} is said to be the base of the {{ill|Kunu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|久努国造}}<ref name="shizuoka"/>. However, Yamana District was originally established in {{ill|Yōrō|ja|養老}} 6 ({{ill|722|ja|722年}}) by separating 8 gō from Sae District (Sano District, Saya District)<ref>{{ill|Sugano no Mamichi|ja|菅野真道}} and others, "Yōrō 6 Year Month 2 Day 16 entry," ''{{ill|Shoku Nihongi|ja|続日本紀}}'', 797.</ref>, and following this, the original territory of the Kunu no Kuni no Miyatsuko would have covered both Yamana and Sano Districts. On this point, there is a theory viewing the Wadaoka Kofun Cluster as the tombs of the Kunu no Kuni no Miyatsuko, and the chief-tomb lineage built to its south as the lineage of the ancestors of the Suga no Kuni no Miyatsuko, continuing to the Kunu-no-Atai and Saya-no-Atai. This theory holds that the ancestors of the Suga no Kuni no Miyatsuko, who administered Sano District and {{ill|Kikō District|ja|城飼郡}}, strengthened their ties with the {{ill|Soga clan|ja|蘇我氏}}, which was expanding within the Yamato court, in response to the growing influence of the Wadaoka Kofun Cluster powers. Moreover, since they were a rising power within the {{ill|Mononobe clan|ja|物部氏}} lineage like the Tōtsuōmi no Kuni no Miyatsuko and Kunu no Kuni no Miyatsuko, they are said to have invented Umashiini-no-Mikoto of the Jinmu court — not in the Mononobe genealogy — in order to make their bloodline appear ancient<ref>"Chapter 3: The Wadaoka Kofun Cluster and the Suga no Kuni no Miyatsuko, Section 3: The Yamato Court and the Suga no Kuni no Miyatsuko," ''Kakegawa Shishi'' Vol. 1, Kakegawa Shishi Editorial Committee, 1997, pp. 231-233.</ref>.

On the other hand, regarding {{ill|Kikō District|ja|城飼郡}} and {{ill|Haibara District|ja|榛原郡}}, no identification of kuni no miyatsuko has been made, and in Kikō District there is also a {{ill|keyhole-shaped kofun|ja|前方後円墳}} built in the {{ill|4th century|ja|4世紀}}; a theory proposes the {{ill|Kikugawa River|ja|菊川}} basin as a candidate for the Suga Province<ref name="shimizu">"Volume 2: Primitive and Ancient Shimizu, Chapter 1: The Development of Ihohara Culture," ''Shimizu Shishi'' Vol. 1, Shimizu Shishi Editorial Committee, 1976, p. 157.</ref>. Among the {{ill|Engishiki-listed shrines|ja|式内社}} in Kikō District is also the {{ill|Hinata-no Shrine|ja|比奈多乃神社}}, which enshrines the ancestral deity of the kuni no miyatsuko.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
Unknown.

=== Related Shrines ===
*'''{{ill|Takaten Shrine|ja|高天神社}}''' (''takaten jinja'')
*:A shrine located in Shimohikata, {{ill|Kakegawa, Shizuoka|ja|掛川市|lt=Kakegawa|lt_ja=掛川市}}, {{ill|Shizuoka Prefecture|ja|静岡県}}, enshrining {{ill|Ame-no-Hohi-no-Mikoto|ja|天之菩卑能命|lt=Ame-no-Hohi-no-Mikoto|lt_ja=天菩毘命}} and {{ill|Takamimusubi-no-Mikoto|ja|高皇産霊尊}}, the ancestral deities of the kuni no miyatsuko. A candidate for the Tōtōmi Province {{ill|Engishiki-listed shrine|ja|式内社}} Hinata-no Shrine.
*'''{{ill|Hinata-no Shrine|ja|比奈多乃神社}}''' (''hinata no jinja'')
*:A shrine located in Kamihikata, Kakegawa City, Shizuoka Prefecture, enshrining {{ill|Takehiratori-no-Mikoto|ja|建比良鳥命}}, the ancestral deity of the kuni no miyatsuko. A candidate for the Tōtōmi Province Engishiki-listed shrine Hinata-no Shrine.
*'''{{ill|Ōmi-Kunitama Shrine|ja|淡海國玉神社}}''' (''ōmi-kunitama jinja'')
*:A shrine located in Mitsuke, {{ill|Iwata, Shizuoka|ja|磐田市}}, Shizuoka Prefecture; in ancient times it was called the Tōtōmi Province Ōmi Iwai Shrine. The name Iwai-kami shares affinity with the many Iwai-kami/Iwahi-kami deities ({{ill|Iwai Shrine|ja|磐井神社}}, {{ill|Izumo Iwai Shrine (disambiguation)|ja|出雲伊波比神社 (曖昧さ回避)|lt=Iwai Shrine|lt_ja=伊波比神社}}) in {{ill|Musashi Province|ja|武蔵国}}, the eastern destination of the same-lineage {{ill|Ise-tsu-hiko|ja|伊勢津彦}}<ref name="izumo">{{ill|Hōga Toshio|ja|宝賀寿男}}, "Chapter 1: The Yamato Court's Pacification of Izumo and After," ''Kodai Shizoku no Kenkyū 16: Izumo-shi and Haji-shi — The Rise and Fall of the Original Izumo Kingdom'', Aogaki Shuppan, 2020, pp. 59, 60.</ref>.

=== Tombs ===
*Kamihirakawa-Ōtsuka Kofun (''kamihirakawa-ōtsuka kofun'')
*:A 20-m-long {{ill|keyhole-shaped kofun|ja|前方後円墳}} that existed in Kamihirakawa, {{ill|Kikugawa, Shizuoka|ja|菊川市}}, Shizuoka Prefecture; investigations before its leveling considered it to be a recent mound, but previously three {{ill|bronze mirrors|ja|銅鏡}} including a {{ill|triangular-rimmed divine beast mirror|ja|三角縁神獣鏡}}, 3 {{ill|magatama|ja|勾玉}}, 3 {{ill|tubular beads|ja|管玉}}, and iron sword fragments were excavated along with {{ill|cinnabar|ja|朱}}. Built in the latter half of the {{ill|4th century|ja|4世紀}}. In the "Map of the Presumed Ruling Range of the Kuni no Miyatsuko" in the ''Shimizu Shishi'', Ōtsuka Kofun is listed as a kofun of Suga Province<ref name="shimizu"/>.
*Kamihirakawa Kofun No. 2 (''kamihirakawa nigō fun'')
*:A 24-m-long keyhole-shaped kofun that existed in Kamihirakawa, Kikugawa City, Shizuoka Prefecture; {{ill|haniwa|ja|埴輪}} are said to have been excavated.

== Footnotes ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
{{Notelist}}
{{Reflist}}

== See also ==
*{{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}
*{{ill|Kunu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|久努国造}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:すかのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:遠江国|くにのみやつこ]]
[[Category:出雲氏|*すかのくにのみやつこ]]
[[Category:物部氏|-すかのくにのみやつこ]]
[[Category:静岡県の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:素賀国造]]