{{基礎情報 公家
| 氏名 = Kashiwade-no-Areshi
| 画像 =
| 画像サイズ =
| 画像説明 =
| 時代 = {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代}}
| 生誕 = Unknown
| 死没 = Unknown
| 改名 =
| 別名 = Arato, Arato-no-Mikoto
| 諡号 =
| 神号 =
| 戒名 =
| 墓所 =
| 官位 = First {{ill|Wakasa no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|若狭国造}}
| 主君 = {{ill|Emperor Richū|ja|履中天皇}}, {{ill|Emperor Ingyō|ja|允恭天皇}}
| 氏族 = {{ill|Kashiwade clan|ja|膳氏|lt=Kashiwade-no-Omi|lt_ja=膳臣}}, later {{ill|Wakasakurabe clan|ja|稚桜部氏|lt=Wakasakurabe-no-Omi|lt_ja=稚桜部臣}}
| 父母 =
| 兄弟 =
| 妻   =
| 子   =
| 特記事項 =
}}
'''Kashiwade-no-Areshi''' (''kashiwade no areshi'') or '''Wakasakurabe-no-Areshi''' (''wakasakurabe no areshi''; dates of birth and death unknown) was a {{ill|gōzoku|ja|豪族}} of early {{ill|5th century|ja|5世紀}} ancient Japan and the first '''{{ill|Wakasa no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|若狭国造}}'''. His {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} was {{ill|Omi|ja|臣}}.

== Records ==
In ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'' Volume 12, it is recorded that {{ill|Iware Pond|ja|磐余池}} (Iwareichishi Pond) was constructed in {{ill|Emperor Richū|ja|履中天皇}} Year 2 Month 11<ref>''Nihon Shoki'', Emperor Richū Year 2 Month 11 entry.</ref>. In the winter of the following year, the emperor floated a double-hulled boat (''futamata'') and held a banquet; on that occasion, the one who offered sake was Areshi. At that time, an out-of-season cherry blossom petal fell into the emperor's cup; the emperor, puzzled, ordered {{ill|Mononobe-no-Nagamai|ja|物部長真胆}} to investigate where the cherry blossom had come from. Nagamai successfully located the cherry tree and offered it. Because of this, the emperor's palace was named "Iware Wakasakura-no-Miya," and Areshi and Nagamai each received the clan surnames of Wakasakurabe-no-Omi and Wakasakurabe-no-Miyatsuko<ref>''Nihon Shoki'', Emperor Richū Year 3 Month 11 Day 6 entry.</ref>.

In the ''{{ill|Kojiki|ja|古事記}}'', the events of this time are recorded only as
{{quotation|Also in this <small>(ko)</small> reign <small>(miyo)</small>, the Wakasakurabe-no-Omi and others were granted the name Wakasakurabe}}<ref>''Kojiki'' Lower Volume, Emperor Richū entry.</ref>

The {{ill|Kashiwade clan|ja|膳氏}} was a clan that served the emperor's meals, and thus obtained this honor. However, the reliability of this tale is low, and the theory that the clan name derives from the province name "Wakasa," a {{ill|Miketsukuni|ja|御食国|lt=Miketsu-kuni|lt_ja=御食つ国}}, is dominant. In the Wakasa no Kuni no Miyatsuko section of the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀|lt=Kuji Hongi|lt_ja=旧事本紀}}'', "During the reign of Tōtsu-Asuka Court ({{ill|Emperor Ingyō|ja|允恭天皇}}), Arato-no-Mikoto (''arato-no-mikoto''), son of Sashiro-yone-no-Mikoto (''sashiroyone-no-mikoto''), ancestor of the Kashiwade-no-Omi, was appointed kuni no miyatsuko," and he is considered the first Wakasa no Kuni no Miyatsuko<ref>{{ill|Hōga Toshio|ja|宝賀寿男}}, "Chapter 2: Imperial Family Clans, Section 5: The Abe Clan, 4 Kashiwade-no-Omi, Takahashi-no-Asomi," ''Kodai Shizoku Keifu Shūsei'' Volume 1, Ancient Clan Research Association, 1986, p. 390.</ref>.

According to ''Nihon Shoki'' Volume 29, in {{ill|Emperor Tenmu|ja|天武天皇}} Year 13 ({{ill|684|ja|684年}}), the Wakasakurabe-no-Omi clan was granted the {{ill|Asomi|ja|朝臣}} kabane under the {{ill|Yakusa no Kabane|ja|八色の姓}}<ref>''Nihon Shoki'', Emperor Tenmu Year 13 Month 11 Day 1 entry.</ref>.

== Footnotes ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
{{Reflist}}

== References ==
* ''Nihon Shoki'' (Vol. 2) · (Vol. 5), {{ill|Iwanami Bunko|ja|岩波文庫}}, 1994, 1995
* ''Nihon Shoki Zen-Gendaigo-yaku'' (Upper) · (Lower), {{ill|Kōdansha Gakujutsu Bunko|ja|講談社学術文庫}}, {{ill|Ujitani Tsutomu|ja|宇治谷孟}} trans., 1988
* ''Kojiki'' Kanyaku Nihon no Koten 1, {{ill|Shogakukan|ja|小学館}}, 1983
* ''Nihon Kodai Shizoku Jiten'' [Reissue], {{ill|Saeki Arikiyo|ja|佐伯有清}} ed., {{ill|Yūzankaku|ja|雄山閣}}, 2015

== See also ==
*{{ill|List of Figures from before the Asuka Period|ja|飛鳥時代以前の人物一覧}}
*{{ill|Iware|ja|磐余}}
*{{ill|Wakasakurabe-no-Ioise|ja|稚桜部五百瀬}}

{{Japanese-history-stub}}
{{people-stub}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:かしわて の あれし}}
[[Category:膳氏|あれし]]
[[Category:日本神話の人物]]
[[Category:古墳時代の人物]]
[[Category:古代日本の人物]]
[[Category:若狭国の人物]]
[[Category:日本古代の武人・武官]]
[[Category:生没年不詳]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:膳余磯]]