{{基礎情報 公家
| 氏名 = Arata-wake-no-Mikoto
| 画像 =
| 画像サイズ =
| 画像説明 =
| 時代 = {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代}}
| 生誕 = Unknown
| 死没 = Unknown
| 改名 =
| 別名 = Arata-wake, Ō-Arata-wake-no-Mikoto
| 諡号 =
| 神号 =
| 戒名 =
| 墓所 =
| 官位 =
| 主君 = {{ill|Empress Jingū|ja|神功皇后}}, {{ill|Emperor Ōjin|ja|応神天皇}}
| 氏族 = Ancestor of {{ill|Kamitsukenu clan|ja|上毛野氏|lt=Kamitsukenu-no-Kimi|lt_ja=上毛野君}} and {{ill|Shimotsukenu clan|ja|下毛野氏|lt=Shimotsukenu-no-Kimi|lt_ja=下毛野君}}, etc.
| 父母 =
| 兄弟 =
| 妻   =
| 子   = {{ill|Takehase-no-Mikoto|ja|竹葉瀬命}}<ref name="名前なし-rKfk-1">''Nihon Shoki''</ref>, {{ill|Tamichi-no-Kimi|ja|田道君}}<ref name="名前なし-rKfk-1"/>
| 特記事項 =
}}
'''Arata-wake''' (''arata-wake''{{Sfn|荒田別（古代氏族）|2010年}}; {{ill|dates of birth and death unknown|ja|生没年不詳}}) was a {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代}} {{ill|figure|ja|人物}} appearing in the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'' and other texts. Also written '''Arata-wake-no-Mikoto''' or '''Ō-Arata-wake-no-Mikoto'''.

A distant ancestor of the {{ill|Kamitsukenu clan|ja|上毛野氏|lt=Kamitsukenu-no-Kimi|lt_ja=上毛野君}}, he was a {{ill|military commander|ja|武将}} said to have been dispatched to {{ill|Korea|ja|朝鮮}} during the reigns of {{ill|Empress Jingū|ja|神功皇后}} and {{ill|Emperor Ōjin|ja|応神天皇}} (the 15th emperor).

== Records ==
According to the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'' Empress Jingū Year 49 Month 3 entry, he was appointed general together with {{ill|Shika-wake|ja|鹿我別}} and participated in the campaign against {{ill|Silla|ja|新羅}}. The Empress Jingū Year 50 Month 2 entry records his return.

In the same text's Emperor Ōjin Year 15 Month 8 entry, he was dispatched to {{ill|Baekje|ja|百済}} together with {{ill|Kamu-wake|ja|巫別}}, and in the following year brought back {{ill|Wani|ja|王仁}}. In this entry, Arata-wake and Kamu-wake are described as "ancestors of the Kamitsukenu-no-Kimi."

Moreover, according to the ''{{ill|Shinsen Shōjiroku|ja|新撰姓氏録}}'', he is recorded as the father of {{ill|Kamitsukenu-no-Tamichi|ja|上毛野田道}}. In the ''Nihon Shoki'', Tamichi is described as the younger brother of {{ill|Takehase|ja|竹葉瀬}}, and in the Kenu clan genealogy, Takehase is also transmitted as the son of Arata-wake.

In the ''{{ill|Shoku Nihongi|ja|続日本紀}}'' {{ill|Enryaku|ja|延暦}} 9 ({{ill|790|ja|790年}}) Month 7 entry, the memorial by {{ill|Sugano no Mamichi|ja|菅野真道|lt=Tsu-no-Muraji-Mamichi|lt_ja=津連真道}} and others also mentions Arata-wake's dispatch to Baekje, and the ''{{ill|Sumiyoshi Taisha Jindaiki|ja|住吉大社神代記}}'' also records Arata-wake's name in the legend of the Silla campaign.

== Descendant Clans ==
In the ''{{ill|Shinsen Shōjiroku|ja|新撰姓氏録}}'', the following clans are recorded as descendants.
* Kōbetsu
** Ukyō Ōno-no-Asomi — descendants of Ō-Arata-wake-no-Mikoto, 4th-generation descendant of Toyoki-iri-hiko-no-Mikoto.
** Ukyō Tanabe-no-Fubito — descendants of Ō-Arata-wake-no-Mikoto, 4th-generation descendant of Toyoki-iri-hiko-no-Mikoto.
** Ukyō Sajino-no-Kimi — same as above.
** Yamato Province Hirokitsu-no-Kimi — same ancestor as Shimono-no-Kimi. Descendants of Ō-Arata-wake-no-Mikoto, 4th-generation descendant of Toyoki-iri-hiko-no-Mikoto.
** Kawachi Province Tomi-no-Muraji — same ancestor as Hirokitsu-no-Kimi. Descendants of Toyoki-iri-hiko-no-Mikoto. 4th-generation descendant Arata-wake-no-Mikoto's son {{ill|Tamichi|ja|上毛野田道}}-no-Kimi (omitted below).
* Undetermined Miscellaneous Surnames
** Kawachi Province Ike — descendants of Arata-wake-no-Mikoto, 4th-generation descendant of Toyoki-iri-hiko-no-Mikoto.

== Considerations ==
Since many of the clans recorded in the ''Shinsen Shōjiroku'' are based in Kawachi, there is a theory that Arata-wake was a legendary figure of the Fuhito-lineage clans of Kawachi who claimed descent from {{ill|Wani|ja|王仁}}{{要出典|date=2022年2月}}. Based on this, there is also a theory of clan migration from Kawachi to the {{ill|Kenu|ja|毛野}} region{{Sfn|荒田別（古代氏族）|2010年}}.

Regarding {{ill|Empress Jingū|ja|神功皇后}}'s Silla invasion, there are voices that question the historical validity, and following this, the existence of Arata-wake is also not certain, though some argue it is acceptable to acknowledge that in the early period there were persons among the Kantō powers involved in diplomacy with Korea<ref>Mizoguchi Mutsuko, "Arata-wake" (''Asahi Nihon Rekishi Jinbutsu Jiten'') — [https://kotobank.jp/word/%E8%8D%92%E7%94%B0%E5%88%A5-1051329 entry] on Asahi Shimbun Kotobank.</ref>.

In addition, based on the reading "arata," there is a theory connecting him with {{ill|Nitta District|ja|新田郡}} of {{ill|Kōzuke Province|ja|上野国}} (around present-day {{ill|Ōta, Gunma|ja|太田市|lt=Ōta|lt_ja=太田市}} in {{ill|Gunma Prefecture|ja|群馬県}})<ref>Recorded in ''Nihon Chiri Shiryō'' (from Chapter 3 Section 4, ''Kenu-no-Kuni no Kenkyū: Kofun Jidai no Kaimei'' Part 2).</ref>{{Sfn|荒田別（古代氏族）|2010年}}, and some assert he is the buried person of the {{ill|Ōta Tenjinyama Kofun|ja|太田天神山古墳}}, the largest kofun in eastern Japan, which exists in this area<ref>Maezawa Terumasa, ''Kenu-no-Kuni no Kenkyū: Kofun Jidai no Kaimei'' Part 2 ({{ill|Gendai Shichōsha|ja|現代思潮社}}, 1982), Chapter 3 Section 4, Factors in the Development of Kenu Province.</ref>.

== Footnotes ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
{{reflist}}

== References ==
* {{Cite book|和書|editor=|author=|year=2010|chapter=荒田別|title=日本古代氏族人名辞典 普及版|publisher=[[吉川弘文館]]|isbn=978-4642014588|ref={{Harvid|荒田別（古代氏族）|2010年}}}}

== See also ==
* {{ill|List of Figures from before the Asuka Period|ja|飛鳥時代以前の人物一覧}}
* {{ill|Kamitsukenu clan|ja|上毛野氏}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:あらたわけ}}
[[Category:日本神話の人物]]
[[Category:古墳時代の人物]]
[[Category:古代日本の人物]]
[[Category:上野国の人物]]
[[Category:群馬県の歴史]]
[[Category:上毛野氏|伝あらたわけ]]
[[Category:古代日朝関係]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:荒田別]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
