{{日本の氏族
|家名 = Katsuragi no Kuni no Miyatsuko
|家紋 = <!-- 家紋の画像 -->
|家紋名称 =
|本姓 = {{ill|Katsuragi clan (kuni no miyatsuko)|ja|葛城氏 (葛城国造)|lt=Katsuragi clan|lt_ja=葛城氏}}
|家祖 = {{ill|Tsurugine-no-Mikoto|ja|剣根命}}
|種別 = {{ill|Shinbetsu|ja|神別}} ({{ill|Tenjin|ja|天神}})
|出身地 = {{ill|Yamato Province|ja|大和国|lt=Ōyamato Province|lt_ja=大倭国}}
|根拠地 = Katsuragi (later {{ill|Yamato Province|ja|大和国}})
|人物 = See [[#People]]
|支流 = {{ill|Kamo clan|ja|賀茂朝臣氏|lt=Kamo clan|lt_ja=賀茂氏}}
}}

'''Katsuragi no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''kazuraki no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''kazuraki kokuzō'', ''katsuragi no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''katsuragi kokuzō'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled {{ill|Katsuragi Province|ja|葛城国}} (the southwestern part of the {{ill|ritsuryō province|ja|令制国}} of {{ill|Yamato Province|ja|大和国}}). Also called Katsuragi no Kuni no Miyatsuko (with the alternative reading).

== Overview ==
The "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'' gives '''Katsuragi no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''.

=== Ancestry ===
According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'', '''{{ill|Tsurugine-no-Mikoto|ja|剣根命}}''', the ancestor of the Katsuragi-no-Atai, was appointed the first Katsuragi no Kuni no Miyatsuko during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Jinmu|ja|神武天皇}}. According to the ''Shinsen Shōjiroku'', Tsurugine-no-Mikoto was the 5th-generation descendant of '''{{ill|Takamimusubi-no-Mikoto|ja|高皇産霊尊}}''' and the 4th-generation descendant of {{ill|Ame-no-Oshitachi-no-Mikoto|ja|天押立命}}.

=== Clan ===
'''{{ill|Katsuragi|ja|葛城氏 (葛城国造)|lt=Katsuragi|lt_ja=葛城}}''' (''katsuragi-uji''; {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} of {{ill|Atai (kabane)|ja|直 (姓)|lt=Atai|lt_ja=直}}). They were granted the {{ill|Muraji|ja|連}} kabane in {{ill|Emperor Tenmu|ja|天武天皇}} 12 ([[683]]), and the {{ill|Imiki|ja|忌寸}} kabane in year 14. The {{ill|Katsuragi clan|ja|葛城氏}} that flourished in the {{ill|5th century|ja|5世紀}} were descendants of {{ill|Takenouchi-no-Sukune|ja|武内宿禰}} and held the kabane of {{ill|Omi (kabane)|ja|臣|lt=Omi|lt_ja=臣}} — they were of a different line, but came to be assimilated through marriage ties.

== Base ==
=== Territory ===
The territory of the kuni no miyatsuko was the region then called '''Katsuragi Province''', corresponding to the later {{ill|Katsuragi|ja|葛城}} region of Yamato Province (both {{ill|Katsujō District|ja|葛上郡}} and {{ill|Katsuge District|ja|葛下郡}}). Present-day {{ill|Gose, Nara|ja|御所市|lt=Gose|lt_ja=御所市}} and {{ill|Yamato-Takada, Nara|ja|大和高田市|lt=Yamato-Takada|lt_ja=大和高田市}} in {{ill|Nara Prefecture|ja|奈良県}}.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
Unknown. In the region, there are Myōjin-taisha and Taisha shrines under the Engi regime such as the {{ill|Katsuragi-no-Miagata Shrine|ja|葛城御縣神社|lt=Katsuragi-no-Miagata Shrine|lt_ja=葛城御県神社}} and the {{ill|Katsuragi Hitokotonushi Shrine|ja|葛城一言主神社|lt=Katsuragi-ni-masu Hitokotonushi Shrine|lt_ja=葛城坐一言主神社}}.

== People ==
*'''{{ill|Arata-hiko|ja|荒田彦}}''' (''arata-hiko'')
*:A figure of the {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代|lt=Kofun period|lt_ja=古墳時代}}; his daughter {{ill|Katsura-hime|ja|葛比売}} was the mother of {{ill|Katsuragi-no-Sotsuhiko|ja|葛城襲津彦}} of the imperial-descent Katsuragi clan.

== Descendants ==
*{{ill|Katsuragi-no-Iwamura|ja|葛城磐村}}
*:A figure of the Kofun period. His daughter Hiroko became a consort ({{ill|hin (title)|ja|嬪|lt=hin|lt_ja=嬪}}) of {{ill|Emperor Yōmei|ja|用明天皇}}.
*Woman (name unknown)
*:The wife of {{ill|Soga no Iname|ja|蘇我稲目}} (mother of {{ill|Soga no Umako|ja|蘇我馬子}}) is thought to have been from the Katsuragi clan.
*{{ill|Katsuragi-no-Yamada-no-Mizuko|ja|葛城山田瑞子}}
*:A figure of the reign of {{ill|Emperor Kinmei|ja|欽明天皇|lt=Emperor Kinmei|lt_ja=欽明朝}}. Was dispatched to {{ill|Kojima District|ja|児島郡}} as a ''tazukai'' (rice-field commissioner) along with Iname.
*Katsuragi-no-Atai Abe
*:The dates are unknown, but the name "Katsuragi-no-Atai Abe of Gōri, Enuma District, Echizen Province" appears on a {{ill|mokkan|ja|木簡|lt=wooden tablet|lt_ja=木簡}} excavated from the Heijō Palace site.

== References ==
* ''{{ill|Kokushi Daijiten|ja|国史大辞典 (昭和時代)|lt=Kokushi Daijiten|lt_ja=國史大辭典}}'' ({{ill|Yoshikawa Kōbunkan|ja|吉川弘文館}})
* Sakamoto Tarō, Hirano Kunio, ''Nihon Kodai Shizoku Jinmei Jiten'' (Yoshikawa Kōbunkan)
* ''Nihon Kodai Jinmei Jiten'' (Yoshikawa Kōbunkan)
* ''Nihon-shi Kō-jiten'' ({{ill|Yamakawa Shuppansha|ja|山川出版社}})
* ''{{ill|Shintō Daijiten|ja|神道大辞典}}'' ({{ill|Rinsen Shoten|ja|臨川書店}})
* {{ill|Prince Toneri|ja|舎人親王}}, ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}''

== See also ==
*[[List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|国造#一覧]]
*{{ill|Six Agata of Yamato|ja|倭の六県}}
{{Japanese-history-stub}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:かすらきのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:大和国]]
[[Category:奈良県の歴史]]
[[Category:葛城氏|*]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:葛城国造]]