'''Tsuge no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''tsuge kokuzō''; dates of birth and death unknown) was a {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代}} gōzoku who appears in the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}''. One of the '''{{ill|Tsuge no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|闘鶏国造}}''' ({{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}}). His real name is unknown.

== Overview ==
A figure of the {{ill|Tsuge no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|闘鶏国造}}, one of the {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}}; the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'' records that he was demoted to the {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} of {{ill|Inaki|ja|稲置}} during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Ingyō|ja|允恭天皇|lt=Emperor Ingyō|lt_ja=允恭朝}} due to his disrespect toward {{ill|Oshisaka-no-Ōnakatsu-no-Hime|ja|忍坂大中姫}}.

== Insults toward the Empress ==
In the 2nd year of {{ill|Emperor Ingyō|ja|允恭天皇}} (estimated [[413]]), when {{ill|Oshisaka-no-Ōnakatsu-no-Hime|ja|忍坂大中姫}} (''oshisaka no ōnakatsu-hime'') became {{ill|Empress|ja|皇后|lt=Empress|lt_ja=皇后}}, "{{ill|Osakabe|ja|刑部}}" (''oshisakabe'') was established as a {{ill|nashiro|ja|名代}}-be in her honor. When the Empress was still unmarried and was once playing alone in a garden,

{{quotation|Then the {{ill|Tsuge no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|闘鶏国造}} (''tsuge no kuni no miyatsuko'') came along the roadside path. Mounted on his horse, he peered over the fence, spoke to the Empress, and mockingly said,
"Can you really make a garden, you?" And he also said, "Well, mistress, give me one stalk of that ''araragi'' there."

(At that time the Tsuge no Kuni no Miyatsuko came along the adjacent path, and on horseback, spoke to her over the hedge, saying mockingly, "Can you make a garden skillfully, you there?" He also said, "Well now, mistress (''toji''), one stalk of that wild rocambole (''nobiru'') there.")}}

The ''Nihon Shoki'' does not record the name of this Tsuge no Kuni no Miyatsuko. After several rude exchanges, the Empress said,

{{quotation|"Obito (lord), I shall not forget." (You, I shall not forget.)}}

Oshisaka-no-Ōnakatsu-no-Hime, now Empress, found the man who had demanded the ''araragi'' from horseback, and considered killing him to punish the offense of that former day, but

{{quotation|"Your servant's offense truly deserves death. However, on that day I did not know that you would become a noble person."

(Approx.: My offense truly deserves death. However, at that time I did not know you would become such a noble person.)}}

he pleaded; the Empress spared him the death penalty and demoted his {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} to {{ill|Inaki|ja|稲置}}<ref>''Nihon Shoki'', Emperor Ingyō, Year 2, 2nd month, 14th day entry.</ref>.

== Footnotes ==
{{Reflist}}

== References ==
*"Tashizoku Gaikan," ''Koju Kinobōma'', 2006.
*''Ihon Aso-shi Keizu''
*''Nihon Shoki'' (vol. 2), {{ill|Iwanami Bunko|ja|岩波文庫}}, 1994.
*''Nihon Shoki Zen-Gendaigoyaku'' (Jō), {{ill|Kōdansha Gakujutsu Bunko|ja|講談社学術文庫}}, translated by {{ill|Ujitani Tsutomu|ja|宇治谷孟}}, 1988.

== See also ==
*{{ill|List of Figures from before the Asuka Period|ja|飛鳥時代以前の人物一覧}}
*{{ill|Tsuge no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|闘鶏国造}}
*{{ill|Ō clan|ja|多氏}}
*{{ill|Inaki|ja|稲置}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:つのこのきみ}}
[[Category:古墳時代の人物]]
[[Category:古代日本の人物]]
[[Category:日本古代の武人・武官]]
[[Category:生没年不詳]]
[[Category:多氏]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:角古君]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
