{{日本の氏族
|家名 = Tsunuga no Kuni no Miyatsuko
|家紋 = <!-- 家紋の画像 -->
|家紋名称 =
|本姓 = {{ill|Tsunuga clan|ja|角鹿氏}}
|家祖 = {{ill|Takeisakuhi-no-Mikoto|ja|建功迫日命}}
|種別 = {{ill|Kōbetsu|ja|皇別}}
|出身地 = {{ill|Yamato Province|ja|大和国|lt=Ōyamato Province|lt_ja=大倭国}}
|根拠地 = Tsunuga (later {{ill|Echizen Province|ja|越前国}})
|人物 = See [[#People|People]]
|支流 = {{ill|Tsunuga-Ama clan|ja|角鹿海氏}}
}}
'''Tsunuga no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''tsunuga no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''tsunuga kokuzō'', ''tsunoga no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''tsunoga kokuzō'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled [[#Territory|Tsunuga Province]] (the southern part of the {{ill|ritsuryō province|ja|律令国}} of {{ill|Echizen Province|ja|越前国}}).

== Overview ==
=== Ancestry ===
*The "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'' records that {{ill|Takeisasahi-no-Mikoto|ja|建功狭日命}} was appointed Tsunuga no Kuni no Miyatsuko during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Seimu|ja|成務天皇}}.
*The ''{{ill|Kojiki|ja|古事記}}'' {{ill|Emperor Kōrei|ja|孝霊天皇}} chapter records that Hikosashi-kata-wake-no-Mikoto was the ancestor of the Tsunuga-ama-no-Atai.

=== Clan ===
'''{{ill|Tsunuga clan|ja|角鹿氏}}''' (''tsunuga-uji / tsunoga-uji''; {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} of {{ill|Atai (kabane)|ja|直 (カバネ)|lt=Atai|lt_ja=直}}). Later they took the {{ill|Ason|ja|朝臣}} kabane. Their primary surname later became Tsunuga, with the family name '''Shima''' (also written 嶋). The kuni no miyatsuko house later served as {{ill|Daryō|ja|大領}} of {{ill|Tsuruga District|ja|敦賀郡}} and concurrently as {{ill|Negi|ja|禰宜}} of {{ill|Kehi Jingū|ja|気比神宮}}.

== Base ==
The base of the kuni no miyatsuko was the present-day {{ill|Tsuruga, Fukui|ja|敦賀市|lt=Tsuruga City|lt_ja=敦賀市}}.

=== Territory ===
The territory of the kuni no miyatsuko was the region then called '''Tsunuga Province''', corresponding to the later '''{{ill|Tsuruga District|ja|敦賀郡}}''' of {{ill|Echizen Province|ja|越前国}}, roughly the present-day area around {{ill|Tsuruga, Fukui|ja|敦賀市|lt=Tsuruga City|lt_ja=敦賀市}}, {{ill|Echizen, Fukui|ja|越前町|lt=Echizen Town|lt_ja=越前町}}, and {{ill|Minami-Echizen, Fukui|ja|南越前町|lt=Minami-Echizen Town|lt_ja=南越前町}} in {{ill|Fukui Prefecture|ja|福井県}}.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
The {{ill|tutelary kami|ja|氏神}} of the kuni no miyatsuko is the '''{{ill|Kehi Jingū|ja|氣比神宮}}''', the '''{{ill|ichi-no-miya|ja|一宮}}''' of {{ill|Echizen Province|ja|越前国}} located in the former {{ill|Tsuruga District|ja|敦賀郡}}.

=== Related Shrines ===
Takeisasahi-no-Mikoto, the ancestor of the Tsunuga and Shima families, is considered the original {{ill|enshrined deity|ja|祭神}} of the Tsunuga Shrine, an auxiliary shrine of Kehi Jingū<ref>''{{ill|Shikinaisha Chōsa Hōkoku|ja|式内社調査報告}}''.</ref>. Takeisasahi-no-Mikoto is also said to be the 20th-generation descendant of {{ill|Tsunuga-Arashito|ja|都怒我阿羅斯等}} (''tsunuga-arashito''), after whom the Tsuruga place name — appearing in the Emperor Ōjin section of the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'' — was said to be derived<ref name="ex02">"Genealogy of the Tsunuga no Kuni no Miyatsuko House."</ref>.
*'''{{ill|Nakazato Kofun Cluster|ja|中郷古墳群}}'''
*:A kofun cluster built from the {{ill|4th century|ja|4世紀}} to the {{ill|6th century|ja|6世紀}}, consisting of numerous {{ill|keyhole-shaped kofun|ja|前方後円墳}} and {{ill|round kofun|ja|円墳}}.
*'''{{ill|Tatehora Kofun No. 2|ja|立洞2号墳}}'''
*:A {{ill|scallop-shaped kofun|ja|帆立貝式古墳}} 24.5 meters in total length, built from the end of the 4th century to the beginning of the {{ill|5th century|ja|5世紀}}.

== Descendants ==
Until the {{ill|Meiji period|ja|明治|lt=Meiji|lt_ja=明治}}, they were one of the eight {{ill|shake|ja|社家}} families of {{ill|Kehi Jingū|ja|気比神宮}}; only the Shima family bears the Tsunuga surname.
* Tsunuga (Shima) Norizane (''shima norizane'')
*:A {{ill|Sengoku period|ja|戦国時代 (日本)|lt=Sengoku-period|lt_ja=戦国時代}} warrior. Died in battle at the {{ill|Battle of Tenzutsuyama|ja|天筒山|lt=Tenzutsuyama|lt_ja=天筒山}} in {{ill|Genki|ja|元亀}} 1.
* Tsunuga (Shima) Kazutomi (''shima kazutomi'')
*:Author of the ''Kehi Zokudan''. Ōhafuri of Kehi Shrine.
* Shima Fusao (''shima fusao'')
*:Physician.

Since the {{ill|Meiji period|ja|明治|lt=Meiji|lt_ja=明治}}, the Shima family ceased to be {{ill|Shinto priests|ja|神職}} under the official system; currently, the inheritors of the Tsunuga no Kuni no Miyatsuko house are the former Bansei-in family (Tsunuga family), a branch of the Shima family. They serve as the {{ill|shake|ja|社家}} of {{ill|Kehi Shrine|ja|氣比神社}} located in Kehi-no-shō, {{ill|Echizen, Fukui|ja|越前町|lt=Echizen Town|lt_ja=越前町}} of {{ill|Nyū District, Fukui|ja|丹生郡|lt=Nyū District|lt_ja=丹生郡}} in {{ill|Fukui Prefecture|ja|福井県}}, making this the only clan whose descendants remain as {{ill|shake|ja|社家}}<ref name="ex03">"Famous Families and Generals of Japan," ''Rekishi Tokuhon'' Vol. 57 No. 11, {{ill|Shinjinbutsu Ōraisha|ja|新人物往来社}}</ref> <ref name="ex04">"Kehi Jingū and Empress Jingū," ''Kikan Yamataikoku'' Vol. 98, Azusa Shoin K.K.</ref>.
* Tsunuga Naokazu (''tsunuga naokazu'')
*:{{ill|Gūji|ja|宮司}} of Kehi-no-shō {{ill|Kehi Shrine|ja|氣比神社}}; director of the {{ill|Fukui City Museum of History|ja|福井市立郷土歴史博物館}}; pen name {{ill|Adachi Naokazu|ja|足立尚計}}.

== Genealogy ==

== Footnotes ==
=== Citations ===
{{Reflist}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:つぬかのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:日本の歴史関連のスタブ項目]]
[[Category:神道関連のスタブ項目]]
[[Category:越前国]]
[[Category:福井県の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:角鹿国造]]