{{基礎情報 公家
| 氏名 = Toyoshiwake-no-Mikoto
| 画像 =
| 画像サイズ =
| 画像説明 =
| 時代 = {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代}}
| 生誕 = Unknown
| 死没 = Unknown
| 改名 =
| 別名 = Toyoshiwake-no-Kimi
| 諡号 =
| 神号 =
| 戒名 =
| 墓所 =
| 官位 = {{ill|Tajima no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|但遅麻国造}}
| 主君 = {{ill|Emperor Ōjin|ja|応神天皇}}
| 氏族 = Ancestor of {{ill|Tajima clan|ja|但馬氏|lt=Tajima-no-Kimi|lt_ja=但馬君}} and {{ill|Kusakabe clan|ja|日下部氏|lt=Kusakabe-no-Kimi|lt_ja=日下部君}}
| 父母 = Father: Funaho-no-Sukune
| 兄弟 =
| 妻   =
| 子   = Akone-no-Kimi, Shimanee-no-Kimi, Asako-no-Kimi, Maroko-no-Kimi
| 特記事項 =
}}
'''Toyoshiwake-no-Mikoto''' (''toyoshiwake-no-mikoto'') was a {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代}} {{ill|gōzoku|ja|豪族}} and one of the {{ill|Tajima no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|但遅麻国造}}. In genealogies he is also written as '''Toyoshiwake-no-Kimi'''.

== Overview ==
He appears in the Ansō-ri entry of the {{ill|Shikama District|ja|飾磨郡|lt=Shikama District|lt_ja=餝磨郡}} section in the ''{{ill|Harima no Kuni Fudoki|ja|播磨国風土記}}''. According to it, when {{ill|Emperor Ōjin|ja|応神天皇}} toured {{ill|Tajima Province|ja|但馬国|lt=Tajima|lt_ja=但遅麻}}, his crown fell off during the journey, and as a result, Toyoshiwake-no-Mikoto, the kuni no miyatsuko, was stripped of his name. Thereupon, Akone-no-Mikoto, the Tajima no Kuni no Miyatsuko, apologized to the emperor and offered up 40 ''chōbu'' of rice-fields in place of salt, by which he was forgiven.

Here Toyoshiwake-no-Mikoto is recorded only as "kuni no miyatsuko," and there is also a theory that he was the {{ill|Harima no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|針間国造}}<ref>Kanzaki Masaru, "[https://www.ritsumei.ac.jp/acd/cg/lt/rb/626/626pdf/kanzaki.pdf Kuni no Miyatsuko and Their Kuni (A Rejoinder) — In Response to Mr. Shinokawa Ken's Criticism]"</ref>.

== Genealogy ==
His father was Funaho-no-Sukune, the first Tajima no Kuni no Miyatsuko, and his mother is unknown. He had four children: Akone-no-Kimi, Shimanee-no-Kimi, Asako-no-Kimi, and Maroko-no-Kimi. Among them, Shimanee-no-Kimi served as Wakakusakabe during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Nintoku|ja|仁徳天皇|lt=Emperor Nintoku|lt_ja=仁徳朝}}, and {{ill|Kusakabe-no-Shimako|ja|浦島太郎#浦島子伝説|lt=Kusakabe-no-Shimako|lt_ja=日下部嶋子}} and {{ill|Kusakabe-no-Hyōmai|ja|日下部表米}} are said to be his descendants<ref name="keifu"/>. The descendants of Kusakabe-no-Hyōmai became the {{ill|Asakura clan|ja|朝倉氏}}, the great clan of {{ill|Echizen Province|ja|越前国}} in the {{ill|Sengoku period|ja|戦国時代 (日本)|lt=Sengoku period|lt_ja=戦国時代}}.

== Footnotes ==
{{Reflist|refs=
<ref name="keifu">{{ill|Hōga Toshio|ja|宝賀寿男}}, "Chapter 2: Clans of Imperial Lineage, Section 7: Kusakabe-Clan Families, 1. Tajima no Kuni no Miyatsuko, Kusakabe-no-Kimi, Kusakabe-no-Sukune (1)," ''Kodai Shizoku Keifu Shūsei'', Vol. 1, Kodai Shizoku Kenkyūkai, 1986, pp. 528-529.</ref>
}}

== See also ==
*{{ill|List of Figures from before the Asuka Period|ja|飛鳥時代以前の人物一覧}}
*{{ill|Kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:とよおしわけのみこと}}
[[Category:生没年不詳]]
[[Category:古代日本の人物]]
[[Category:古墳時代の人物]]
[[Category:People of Tajima Province]]
[[Category:播磨国の人物]]
[[Category:兵庫県の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:豊忍別命]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
