{{日本の氏族
|家名 = Harima-Kamo no Kuni no Miyatsuko
|家紋 =
|家紋名称 =
|本姓 = {{ill|Yama clan|ja|山部|lt=Yamatai clan|lt_ja=山直氏}}<ref name="名前なし-20230316134016">Kanzaki Masaru, "Kuni no Miyatsuko and Their Kuni (A Rejoinder) — In Response to Mr. Shinokawa Ken's Criticism [https://www.ritsumei.ac.jp/acd/cg/lt/rb/626/626pdf/kanzaki.pdf]"</ref>
|家祖 = {{ill|Ichiiri-wake-no-Mikoto|ja|市入別命}}
|種別 = {{ill|Kōbetsu|ja|皇別}}
|出身地 = {{ill|Yamato Province|ja|大和国|lt=Ōyamato Province|lt_ja=大倭国}}
|根拠地 = Harima-Kamo Province<br />(Later {{ill|Kamo District, Harima Province|ja|賀茂郡 (播磨国)|lt=Kamo District|lt_ja=賀茂郡}} and {{ill|Taka District|ja|多可郡}} in {{ill|Harima Province|ja|播磨国}})
|人物 = See [[#People|People]]
|支流 = {{ill|Ukita no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|浮田国造}}<br />{{ill|Kamitsukenu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|上毛野国造}}<br />{{ill|Shimotsukenu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|下毛野国造}}
}}
'''Harima-Kamo no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''harima no kamo no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''harima no kamo kokuzō'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled [[#Territory|Harima-Kamo Province]] (northern {{ill|Harima Province|ja|播磨国}}).

== Overview ==
=== Ancestry ===
*According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'', during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Seimu|ja|成務天皇|lt=Emperor Seimu|lt_ja=成務朝}}, '''{{ill|Ichiiri-wake-no-Mikoto|ja|市入別命}}''', son of '''{{ill|Mihowake-no-Mikoto|ja|御諸別王|lt=Miho-wake-no-Mikoto|lt_ja=御穂別命}}''' — of the same lineage as the {{ill|Kamitsukenu-no-Kimi|ja|上毛野君}} — was appointed kuni no miyatsuko.

=== Clan ===
{{ill|Yama clan|ja|山部 (品部)|lt=Yama clan|lt_ja=山氏}} (''yama-uji''; {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} of '''{{ill|Atai (kabane)|ja|直 (姓)|lt=Atai|lt_ja=直}}''')<ref name="名前なし-20230316134016"/>. The ''{{ill|Shinsen Shōjiroku|ja|新撰姓氏録}}'' records them in the "Undetermined Miscellaneous Clans of Kawachi Province" as descendants of Emperor Sujin. Of the same lineage as the {{ill|Kamitsukenu clan|ja|上毛野氏}} ({{ill|Kamitsukenu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|上毛野国造}}), {{ill|Shimotsukenu clan|ja|下毛野氏}} ({{ill|Shimotsukenu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|下毛野国造}}), and {{ill|Kibekibe|ja|吉弥侯部}} ({{ill|Ukita no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|浮田国造}}).

In the ''{{ill|Harima no Kuni Fudoki|ja|播磨国風土記}}'', there appears Okinaga-no-Mikoto (also called Ishiji, Ōnaka-(Okinaga)-Ishiji), the progenitor of the Yamatai of Kamo District, who mediated the relationship between {{ill|Emperor Keikō|ja|景行天皇}} and {{ill|Harima-no-Inabi-no-Ōiratsume|ja|播磨稲日大郎姫}}. Okinaga-no-Mikoto married Izumo-no-Omi-no-Hisurahime and founded {{ill|Sumiyoshi-Sakami Shrine|ja|住吉酒見神社}}; it is said his descendants, the Yama-Sakabito, were the priests of that shrine.

Furthermore, {{ill|Saho Shrine|ja|佐保神社}} is said to have been founded by Abe no Saburō-tayū, a descendant of the Harima-Kamo no Kuni no Miyatsuko.

The {{ill|tomo no miyatsuko|ja|伴造}} clan was the {{ill|Yamabe clan|ja|山部|lt=Yamabe no Muraji|lt_ja=山部連}}, and a notable figure is {{ill|Yamabe no Muraji Odate|ja|伊予来目部小楯|lt=Yamabe no Muraji Odate|lt_ja=山部連小楯}}<ref>{{Cite journal|和書|author=福島好和 |date=1995-05 |url=https://hdl.handle.net/10236/4985 |title=播磨国の佐伯直氏について |journal=人文論究 |ISSN=0286-6773 |publisher=関西学院大学人文学会 |volume=45 |issue=1 |pages=1-15 |id={{CRID|1050282677513400960}}}}</ref>.

== Base ==
=== Territory ===
The kuni no miyatsuko's territory was the region then called '''Harima-Kamo Province''', corresponding to the later {{ill|ritsuryō province|ja|律令国}} of {{ill|Harima Province|ja|播磨国}}'s '''{{ill|Kamo District, Harima Province|ja|賀茂郡 (播磨国)|lt=Kamo District|lt_ja=賀茂郡}}''' and '''{{ill|Taka District|ja|多可郡}}''' — the present-day {{ill|Kita-Harima|ja|北播磨県民局|lt=Kita-Harima|lt_ja=北播磨}} region of {{ill|Hyōgo Prefecture|ja|兵庫県}} ({{ill|Ono, Hyōgo|ja|小野市|lt=Ono|lt_ja=小野市}}, {{ill|Kasai, Hyōgo|ja|加西市|lt=Kasai|lt_ja=加西市}}, {{ill|Katō, Hyōgo|ja|加東市|lt=Katō|lt_ja=加東市}}, {{ill|Nishiwaki, Hyōgo|ja|西脇市|lt=Nishiwaki|lt_ja=西脇市}}, and {{ill|Taka, Hyōgo|ja|多可町|lt=Taka Town|lt_ja=多可町}} in Taka District), and the eastern part of the northernmost edge of {{ill|Naka-Harima|ja|中播磨県民センター|lt=Naka-Harima|lt_ja=中播磨}} (the northeastern part of {{ill|Kamikawa, Hyōgo|ja|神河町|lt=Kamikawa|lt_ja=神河町}} in {{ill|Kanzaki District, Hyōgo|ja|神崎郡|lt=Kanzaki District|lt_ja=神崎郡}}). Kamo District was later divided into {{ill|Kasai District|ja|加西郡}} and {{ill|Katō District|ja|加東郡}}.

The {{ill|Tamaoka Kofun Cluster|ja|玉丘古墳群}} is located in Tamano-chō and Tamaoka-chō of Kasai City.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
Possibly '''Sumiyoshi Shrine''' or '''Saho Shrine''', the {{ill|Engishiki-listed shrines|ja|式内社|lt=Engishiki-listed shrines|lt_ja=式内社}} of {{ill|Kamo District, Harima Province|ja|賀茂郡 (播磨国)|lt=Kamo District|lt_ja=賀茂郡}}.

=== Tombs ===
*'''{{ill|Tamaoka Kofun Cluster|ja|玉丘古墳群}}''' (''tamaoka kofungun'')
*: A {{ill|kofun cluster|ja|古墳群}} of the middle {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代}}, located in Shinke-chō, Tamaoka-chō, and Tamano-chō of {{ill|Kasai, Hyōgo|ja|加西市|lt=Kasai City|lt_ja=加西市}}. It consists of {{ill|keyhole-shaped kofun|ja|前方後円墳}}, {{ill|scallop-shaped kofun|ja|帆立貝式古墳}}, {{ill|round kofun|ja|円墳}}, and others. The ''{{ill|Harima no Kuni Fudoki|ja|播磨国風土記}}'' records the legend of Princess Nehime, daughter of the kuni no miyatsuko, set at Tamaoka.

== People ==
*'''{{ill|Kuroda-wake|ja|黒田別}}''' (''kuroda-wake'')
*: Kuni no miyatsuko during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Ōjin|ja|応神天皇|lt=Emperor Ōjin|lt_ja=応神朝}}. He appears in the ''Harima no Kuni Fudoki'' as Kuni no Miyatsuko Kuroda-wake.
*'''{{ill|Koma|ja|許麻}}''' (''koma'')
*: Father of Princess Nehime. He appears in the ''Harima no Kuni Fudoki'' as Kuni no Miyatsuko Koma.
*'''{{ill|Nehime-no-Mikoto|ja|根日女命}}''' (''nehime-no-mikoto'')
*: Daughter of Koma. {{ill|Emperor Ninken|ja|於奚天皇}} and {{ill|Emperor Kenzō|ja|袁奚天皇}} sent {{ill|Yamabe no Odate|ja|山部小楯}} to seek her hand in marriage, but because the two brothers deferred to each other, the princess is said to have finally grown old and died.
*'''Yamatai (name unknown)'''
*: A figure from {{ill|Kamo District|ja|賀茂郡|lt=Kamo District|lt_ja=賀毛郡}}.

=== ''Kitadera Chishiki-kyō'' ===
In the ''Kitadera Chishiki-kyō'' — in which the congregations of temples including Kitadera in {{ill|Kamo District|ja|賀茂郡}} of {{ill|Harima Province|ja|播磨国}} gathered in {{ill|Tenpyō|ja|天平}} 6 ([[734]]) to copy the "Daichido-kyō" — there appear 8 figures of the Yamatai clan considered to be descendants of the Harima-Kamo no Kuni no Miyatsuko<ref>Matsumoto Nobumichi, "A Study of the Ubasoku and Ubai of the Nara Period [http://repo.komazawa-u.ac.jp/opac/repository/all/20439/KJ00005098071.pdf]"</ref>:
*Yamatai Eitoku
*Yamatai Omifuru
*Yamatai Maro
*Yamatai Otochime
*Yamatai Yasumaro
*Yamatai Komaro
*Yamatai Eshi
*Yamatai Yamamochi

== Footnotes ==
{{Reflist|refs=
<!--
<ref name="houga">[[宝賀寿男]]「四　古墳時代の毛野氏族」『古代氏族の研究⑰　毛野氏 東国の雄族諸武家の源流』青垣出版、2021年、121、122頁。</ref>
-->
}}

== See also ==
*{{ill|Harima no Kuni Fudoki|ja|播磨国風土記}}
*{{ill|Harima no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|針間国造}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:はりまのかものくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:播磨国]]
{{Japanese-history-stub}}
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:針間鴨国造]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
