{{nihongo|'''Naga no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''|長国造|''naga no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''naga kokuzō''}} was a [[kuni no miyatsuko]] who ruled the southern portion of [[Awa Province (Tokushima)|Awa Province]] under the later {{ill|ritsuryō provinces|ja|令制国}}, corresponding to the southern part of modern [[Tokushima Prefecture]].

According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the {{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}, during the reign of [[Emperor Seimu]], Karase-no-Sukune, a 9th-generation descendant of Mimatsuhiko-Iroto-no-Mikoto, was appointed kuni no miyatsuko.<ref>''Kokushi Taikei'', vol. 7, ''Sendai Kuji Hongi'', p. 153.</ref>

The territory of the Naga no Kuni no Miyatsuko is considered to have been centered on the {{ill|Naka River (Tokushima)|ja|那賀川|lt=Naka River}} basin, covering the modern areas of [[Tokushima, Tokushima|Tokushima]], [[Komatsushima, Tokushima|Komatsushima]], [[Anan, Tokushima|Anan]], {{ill|Katsuura District|ja|勝浦郡}}, {{ill|Naka District, Tokushima|ja|那賀郡|lt=Naka District}}, and {{ill|Kaifu District, Tokushima|ja|海部郡 (徳島県)|lt=Kaifu District}}, and the kuni no miyatsuko lineage is thought to be the Naga-no-Atai clan. In general, kuni no miyatsuko of the Atai kabane ruled smaller areas than those of the Ōshi-no-Atai kabane, and because the Naga-no-Atai clan's [[kabane]] was {{ill|Atai|ja|直 (姓)}}, they are said to have been ranked below the Awa-no-Ōshi-no-Atai clan of the [[Awa no Kuni no Miyatsuko|粟国造]]. For this reason, it is thought that just before the {{ill|ritsuryō|ja|律令制}} system the territory had been absorbed into that of the Awa no Kuni no Miyatsuko.<ref>''Kadokawa Nihon Chimei Daijiten (Tokushima-ken)'', pp. 26–27.</ref>

== Citations ==
{{Reflist}}

== References ==
* Kuroita Katsumi et al. (eds.), ''Kojiki, Sendai Kuji Hongi, Shintō Gobusho'' (''Shinteizōho Kokushi Taikei'' vol. 7), Yoshikawa Kōbunkan, 1966.
* Kadokawa Nihon Chimei Daijiten Hensan Iinkai (ed.), ''Kadokawa Nihon Chimei Daijiten (Tokushima-ken)'', Kadokawa Shoten, 1986.

{{Japanese-history-stub}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:なかのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:阿波国]]
[[Category:徳島県の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:長国造]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
