{{日本の氏族
|家名=Tsuge no Kuni no Miyatsuko
<!-- |家紋= 家紋の画像 -->
|家紋名称=
|本姓=Tsuge clan
|家祖=Unknown
|根拠地=Tsuge, {{ill|Yamabe District, Yamato Province|ja|山辺郡|lt=Yamabe District|lt_ja=山辺郡}}, {{ill|Yamato Province|ja|大和国}}
|人物=See [[#People|People]]
|支流=
}}
'''Tsuge no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''tsuge no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''tsuge kokuzō'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled [[#Territory|Tsuge Province]] (northeastern {{ill|Yamato Province|ja|大和国}}).
__TOC__
{{clear}}

== Overview ==
=== Name ===
In the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'' it is '''Tsuge no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (闘鶏国造); also written '''Tsuge no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (都祁国造) or '''Tsuge no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (都下国造).

=== Ancestry ===
Unknown.

=== Clan ===
'''{{ill|Tsuge clan|ja|闘鶏氏}}''' (''tsuge-uji''; {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} of {{ill|Kimi (kabane)|ja|君 (カバネ)|lt=Kimi|lt_ja=君}}). During the reign of {{ill|Emperor Ingyō|ja|允恭天皇|lt=Emperor Ingyō|lt_ja=允恭朝}}, because of disrespect toward Empress {{ill|Oshisaka-no-Ōnakatsu-no-Hime|ja|忍坂大中姫}}, they were demoted to the {{ill|Inagi|ja|稲置}} kabane. Within the same clan, some also held the {{ill|Atai (kabane)|ja|直 (姓)|lt=Atai|lt_ja=直}} kabane.

== Base ==
Tsuge, {{ill|Yamabe District|ja|山辺郡}}, {{ill|Yamato Province|ja|大和国}}. The area around the former {{ill|Tsuge Village|ja|都祁村}} of present-day {{ill|Nara|ja|奈良市|lt=Nara City|lt_ja=奈良市}} in {{ill|Nara Prefecture|ja|奈良県}}.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
Possibly '''{{ill|Tsuge-Mikumari Shrine|ja|都祁水分神社}}'''. Enshrined deities: {{ill|Hayaakitsuhiko|ja|速秋津比古神|lt=Hayaakitsuhiko-no-Mikoto|lt_ja=速秋津比古命}} and {{ill|Ōkunimitama|ja|大国御魂命}}, or {{ill|Ame-no-Mikumari-no-Kami|ja|天之水分神}} and {{ill|Kuni-no-Mikumari-no-Kami|ja|国之水分神}}.

=== Tombs ===
*'''{{ill|Sanryōbo Kofun Cluster|ja|三陵墓古墳群}}''' (''sanryōbo kofungun'')
*: A kofun cluster in {{ill|Tsuge-Minamino-shō, Nara|ja|都祁南之庄町|lt=Tsuge-Minamino-shō-chō|lt_ja=都祁南之庄町}}, {{ill|Nara|ja|奈良市|lt=Nara City|lt_ja=奈良市}}; a connection to the kuni no miyatsuko has been suggested.

== People ==
* '''{{ill|Tsuge-no-Ōyamanushi-no-Kimi|ja|闘鶏大山主|lt=Ōyamanushi-no-Kimi|lt_ja=大山主君}}''' (''ōyamanushi-no-kimi'')
*: Kuni no miyatsuko during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Nintoku|ja|仁徳天皇}}. He first presented ice from an {{ill|ice house|ja|氷室}} to the palace, and thereafter became the manager of the ice house.
*'''{{ill|Tsuge no Kuni no Miyatsuko (Tsunuko)|ja|角古君|lt=Tsuge no Kuni no Miyatsuko|lt_ja=闘鶏国造}}''' (''tsuge kokuzō'')
*: Kuni no miyatsuko during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Ingyō|ja|允恭天皇}}. Demoted to the Inagi kabane for disrespect. Real name unknown.

== Descendants ==
* {{ill|Tsuge-no-Mita|ja|闘鶏御田}} (''tsuge-no-mita'')
*: Also called Inabe-no-Mita. A carpenter during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Yūryaku|ja|雄略天皇}}. A master acrobat who is said to have run over the roof of a tower as if flying.

*'''{{ill|Kita clan|ja|北氏}}'''
*: A gōzoku of Yamabe District and {{ill|shake|ja|社家}} family of {{ill|Tsuge-Mikumari Shrine|ja|都祁水分神社}}. Later came to use the Fujiwara surname.

== See also ==
* {{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}
* {{ill|Himuro Shrine|ja|氷室神社}}

== References ==
* ''Kokushi Daijiten'' ({{ill|Yoshikawa Kōbunkan|ja|吉川弘文館}})
* Sakamoto Tarō, Hirano Kunio, ''Nihon Kodai Shizoku Jinmei Jiten'' ({{ill|Yoshikawa Kōbunkan|ja|吉川弘文館}})
* ''Nihon-shi Kō-jiten'' ({{ill|Yamakawa Shuppansha|ja|山川出版社}})
* ''Shintō Daijiten'' ({{ill|Rinsen Shoten|ja|臨川書店}})

{{DEFAULTSORT:つけのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:日本の歴史関連のスタブ項目]]
[[Category:大和国]]
[[Category:奈良県の歴史]]
[[Category:多氏|#つけのくにのみやつこ]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:闘鶏国造]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
