'''Tsuge-no-Ōyamanushi''' (''tsuge no ōyamanushi''; dates of birth and death unknown) was a member of the {{ill|Kofun-period|ja|古墳時代}} '''{{ill|Tsuge no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|闘鶏国造}}''', a {{ill|gōzoku|ja|豪族}} appearing in the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}''. Also called '''Tsuge-no-Inaki Ōyamanushi-no-Mikoto''' or '''Kuni-no-Miyatsuko Ōyamanushi-no-Kimi'''.

== Overview ==
A figure of the {{ill|Tsuge no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|闘鶏国造}}, one of the {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}}; the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'' records that he presented ice during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Nintoku|ja|仁徳天皇|lt=Emperor Nintoku|lt_ja=仁徳朝}}.

== The Ice House of Tsuge ==
According to volume 11 of the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'', in the 62nd year of Emperor Nintoku (estimated [[375]]), {{ill|Nukata-no-Ōnakatsuhiko-no-Miko|ja|額田大中彦皇子}} (''nukata no ōnakatsuhiko no miko'') went hunting in Tsuge, and discovered what appeared to be a hut in the middle of a field; he sent someone to investigate, who reported that it was a pit-dwelling (''muro''). He then summoned Tsuge-no-Ōyamanushi, the ruler of the land, and asked him what it was and for what purpose it was used. ("Tsuge" is a place name in {{ill|Yamabe District|ja|山辺郡}} of {{ill|Yamato Province|ja|大和国}}, corresponding to the former {{ill|Tsuge Village|ja|都祁村}} of {{ill|Nara Prefecture|ja|奈良県}}, now {{ill|Nara|ja|奈良市|lt=Nara City|lt_ja=奈良市}}.)

"Therefore he summoned Tsuge-no-Inaki Ōyamanushi and asked,

(Nukata:) 'What is that pit in the field?'

(Ōyamanushi:) He replied, 'It is an ice house.'

The prince said, 'How is it stored? And what is it used for?'

(Ōyamanushi:) He replied, 'We dig the earth more than one ''jō'' [about 3 m]. We cover the top with grass. We thickly spread cogon grass and reeds, and take ice and place it thereon. Even after passing the summer, it does not melt. For its use, we use it in hot months by soaking it in water or sake.'"

After this exchange, Nukata-no-Ōnakatsuhiko-no-Miko understood how ice could be stored in an ice house, and presented the ice to the emperor. Thereafter, it is said, the court began storing ice in the last month of winter (''shiwasu'') and distributing it in the spring equinox month (''kisaragi'').<ref>''Nihon Shoki'', Emperor Nintoku, Year 62, "This Year" entry.</ref>

At {{ill|Himuro Shrine|ja|氷室神社}}s throughout Japan, including those in {{ill|Nara|ja|奈良市|lt=Nara|lt_ja=奈良市}} and {{ill|Kyoto|ja|京都市|lt=Kyoto|lt_ja=京都市}}, Ōyamanushi is enshrined alongside Nukata-no-Ōnakatsuhiko-no-Miko and Emperor Nintoku as a deity. It is also well known that {{ill|Prince Nagaya|ja|長屋王}} kept ice houses and drank cow's milk; it has been confirmed from {{ill|wooden tablets|ja|木簡|lt=mokkan|lt_ja=木簡}} that he used the Tsuge ice house.

== Enshrining Shrine ==
*{{ill|Himuro Shrine|ja|氷室神社}} (Kasugano, {{ill|Nara|ja|奈良市|lt=Nara City|lt_ja=奈良市}}, {{ill|Nara Prefecture|ja|奈良県}})

== Footnotes ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
{{Reflist}}

== References ==
* ''Nihon Shoki'' (vol. 2), {{ill|Iwanami Bunko|ja|岩波文庫}}, 1994
* ''Nihon Shoki Zen-Gendaigoyaku (Jō)'', {{ill|Kōdansha Gakujutsu Bunko|ja|講談社学術文庫}}, translated by {{ill|Ujitani Tsutomu|ja|宇治谷孟}}, 1988

== See also ==
*{{ill|Nukata-no-Ōnakatsuhiko-no-Miko|ja|額田大中彦皇子}}
*{{ill|Emperor Nintoku|ja|仁徳天皇}}
*{{ill|Ice house|ja|氷室}}
*{{ill|Natural ice|ja|天然氷}}
*{{ill|Emperor Ingyō|ja|允恭天皇}}
*{{ill|Oshisaka-no-Ōnakatsu-no-Hime|ja|忍坂大中姫}}
*{{ill|Osakabe|ja|刑部}}

{{Japanese-history-stub}}
{{DEFAULTSORT:つけ の おおやまぬし}}
[[Category:日本神話の人物]]
[[Category:古墳時代の人物]]
[[Category:古代日本の人物]]
[[Category:日本古代の武人・武官]]
[[Category:生没年不詳]]
[[Category:多氏]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:闘鶏大山主]]