{{nihongo|'''Asaka no Kuni no Miyatsuko'''|阿尺国造|''asaka no kuni no miyatsuko''}} was a [[kuni no miyatsuko]] who ruled '''Asaka Province''', a region corresponding to the {{ill|Asaka Plain|ja|安積平野}}—bounded on the east by the [[Abukuma River]]—and to {{ill|Asaka District|ja|安積郡|lt=Asaka District (Asaka no kōri)}} of [[Mutsu Province]] under the [[ritsuryō provinces|ritsuryō system]] (present-day [[Kōriyama, Fukushima|Kōriyama City]] in [[Fukushima Prefecture]], which encompasses the former Asaka District).

== Overview ==
* According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the {{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}, during the reign of [[Emperor Seimu]], '''Hitone-no-Mikoto''', a 10th-generation descendant of {{ill|Amenoyutsuhiko-no-Mikoto|ja|天湯津彦命}} who shared the same ancestor as the {{ill|Aki no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|阿岐国造}}, was appointed kuni no miyatsuko.

=== Lineage ===
The '''{{ill|Hasetsukabe clan|ja|丈部氏}}''' (''hasetsukabe-uji''; [[kabane]] of {{ill|Atai|ja|直 (姓)}}). A descendant, Hasetsukabe no Atai Tsugutari, was granted the kabane '''Abe-Asaka no [[Omi (rank)|Omi]]''' in {{ill|Jingo-keiun|ja|神護景雲}} 3 ([[769]]). Further, in the 7th month of {{ill|Hōki|ja|宝亀}} 3 ([[772]]), 13 people including Hasetsukabe no Tsugumori were granted the kabane Abe-Asaka no Omi, and in the 9th month of {{ill|Enryaku|ja|延暦}} 10 ([[791]]), Abe-Asaka no Omi Tsugumori appears as senior district magistrate ({{ill|dairyō|ja|大領|lt=dairyō}}) of Asaka District.<ref>[[Inoue Michiyasu]], ''[https://web.archive.org/web/20080612011649/http://www.geocities.jp/huzisan/rekisitiri2.htm Jōdai Rekishi Chiri Shinkō: Tōsandō]'', Sanseidō, 1943.</ref>

Under the [[ritsuryō]] system, Asaka Province was briefly—from {{ill|Yōrō|ja|養老}} 2 (718) until Yōrō 6 (722) or the 3rd month of {{ill|Jinki|ja|神亀}} 1 (724)—separated from Mutsu Province to form part of {{ill|Iwase Province|ja|石背国}}. Until the construction of [[Taga Castle]], which marked the {{ill|Yamato court's northward expansion|ja|大和朝廷の北進}}, it lay within the northernmost reach of the [[Yamato Kingship]] confronting the {{ill|Emishi|ja|蝦夷}}; after Taga Castle was built, the area is thought to have become the base of the ancient {{ill|gundan|ja|軍団 (古代日本)|lt=gundan}} ("Asaka Brigade"), which served as the defensive garrison.

== Tutelary shrines, etc. ==
* {{ill|Asaka Kuninotsuko Shrine|ja|安積国造神社|lt=Asaka Kuninotsuko Shrine}} (''asaka kunitsuko jinja'') – Said to have been founded by Hitone-no-Mikoto on Mount Akagi (in present-day {{ill|Akagi-machi, Kōriyama|ja|赤木町|lt=Akagi-chō}}, Kōriyama City), originally enshrining {{ill|Wakumusubi|ja|和久産巣日神|lt=Waku-Musubi-no-Kami}} and Amenoyutsuhiko-no-Mikoto; after Hitone-no-Mikoto's death, Hitone-no-Mikoto was also enshrined. It is currently located at 1-6-23 {{ill|Shimizudai, Kōriyama|ja|清水台 (郡山市)|lt=Shimizudai}}, Kōriyama City. Although the founding is said to be ancient, it is not an {{ill|Engishiki shrine|ja|式内社|lt=shikinaisha}}. Descendants of Hitone-no-Mikoto adopted the surname Asaka and served as the priestly {{ill|shake|ja|社家}} family. (Their present surname is Andō, from the [[Fujiwara clan|Fuji]] line.)
* Shimizudai Site (''shimizudai iseki'') – Excavation has confirmed that an ancient Asaka {{ill|kōrige|ja|郡衙|lt=gunga}} (district headquarters) stood in the Shimizudai and neighboring Akagi-yama area of Kōriyama City, where the Asaka Kuninotsuko Shrine is enshrined.<ref name="pref">Fukushima Prefecture – "Corridor of Fukushima's History and Culture": "[http://www.pref.fukushima.jp/bunka/kairou/ken/ken04.html#o IV, Travelling the Ancient Administrative Offices of the Abukuma River Basin – Viewing the Ancient District Offices that Used River Transport – (O) Shimizudai Site, Kōriyama City: Ancient Asaka District Office]."</ref><ref name="city">Kōriyama City: "[http://www.city.koriyama.fukushima.jp/pcp_portal/PortalServlet?DISPLAY_ID=DIRECT&NEXT_DISPLAY_ID=U000004&CONTENTS_ID=12168 Origin of Place Names]."</ref><ref name="city-edu">Kōriyama City Board of Education (ed.), ''Heisei 13–14 Edition: The History of Our Hometown Kōriyama'', p. 14, "[http://www.db.fks.ed.jp/txt/10018.002/html/00014.html 4: Nara and Heian Periods]."</ref> The name "'''Kōriyama'''" is said to derive from this "''gunga''" (district office).<ref name="city" /><ref name="city-edu" />
* {{ill|Ōyasuba Kofun Cluster|ja|大安場古墳群}} (''ōyasuba kofungun'') – The No. 1 tumulus, located at {{ill|Daizenji, Tamura-machi|ja|田村町大善寺|lt=Daizen-ji, Tamura-machi}} in Kōriyama City and thought to have been built in the latter half of the early [[Kofun period]], is the largest {{ill|keyhole-shaped kofun (rectangle)|ja|前方後方墳|lt=zenpōkōhōfun}} in the Tōhoku region.<ref>Kōriyama City: "[http://www.city.koriyama.fukushima.jp/pcp/browserPActionCode=content&ContentID=1107478522833&SiteID=0.html Ōyasuba Kofun Cluster]."</ref> While [[keyhole-shaped kofun|keyhole-shaped kofun (circle)]] symbolizing Yamato Kingship territory are numerous in {{ill|Aizu District|ja|会津郡|lt=Aizu}} to the west, zenpōkōhōfun here share features with those of {{ill|Nasu Province|ja|那須国造#支配領域|lt=Nasu Province}} to the south.
* {{ill|Okitsushima Shrine (Nihonmatsu)|ja|隠津島神社 (二本松市)|lt=Okitsushima Shrine}} (''okitsushima jinja'') – According to shrine tradition, founded in [[Jingo-keiun]] 3 (769) by Hasetsukabe no Atai Tsugutari (''hasetsukabe no atai tsugutari''), a descendant of Hitone-no-Mikoto, claimed to be one of the three Engishiki shrines of Asaka District. It is enshrined at 49 Ōaza Kohata, Haruka, [[Nihonmatsu, Fukushima|Nihonmatsu City]]. According to the entry of {{ill|Shoku Nihongi|ja|続日本紀}} for the 13th day of the 3rd month of Jingo-keiun 3, Hasetsukabe no Atai Tsugutari of outer junior seventh rank, lower grade, was granted the kabane Abe-Asaka no Omi.

== See also ==
* {{ill|List of Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|国造の一覧}}
** ({{ill|Iwase Province|ja|石背国}}: {{ill|Nakadōri|ja|中通り}}) '''[[Shirakawa Barrier|Shirakawa no Seki]]''': {{ill|Shirakawa no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|白河国造|lt=Shirakawa}} ({{ill|Shirakawa District|ja|白河郡}}) — {{ill|Iwase no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|石背国造|lt=Iwase}} ({{ill|Iwase District|ja|岩瀬郡}}) — Asaka (Asaka District) — {{ill|Shinobu no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|信夫国造|lt=Shinobu}} ({{ill|Shinobu District|ja|信夫郡}})
** ({{ill|Iwaki Province|ja|石城国}}: {{ill|Hamadōri|ja|浜通り}}) '''Kikuta no Seki''' ({{ill|Nakoso no Seki|ja|勿来関}}): {{ill|Michinoku no Kikuta no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|道奥菊多国造|lt=Kikuta}} ({{ill|Kikuta District|ja|菊多郡}}) — {{ill|Iwaki no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|石城国造|lt=Iwaki}} ({{ill|Iwaki District|ja|磐城郡}}) — {{ill|Shineha no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|染羽国造|lt=Shineha}} ({{ill|Shineha District|ja|標葉郡}}) — {{ill|Ukita no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|浮田国造|lt=Ukita}} ({{ill|Uda District, Fukushima|ja|宇多郡|lt=Uda District}}) — {{ill|Iku no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|伊久国造|lt=Iku}} ({{ill|Igu District|ja|伊具郡}}) — {{ill|Omoi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|思国造|lt=Omoi}} ({{ill|Shida District, Miyagi|ja|志田郡|lt=Shida District}})
**: ※ From south to north. There is no kuni no miyatsuko named after {{ill|Aizu District|ja|会津郡}} of Iwase Province or {{ill|Namekata District, Fukushima|ja|行方郡 (福島県)|lt=Namekata District}} of Iwaki Province.

== Notes ==
<references />

{{Japanese-history-stub}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:あさかのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:陸奥国]]
[[Category:福島県の歴史]]
[[Category:郡山市の歴史]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:阿尺国造]]
[[Category:Need translation]]
