{{日本の氏族
|家名 = Aso no Kuni no Miyatsuko
|家紋 = <!-- 家紋の画像 -->
|家紋名称 =
|本姓 = {{ill|Aso clan|ja|阿蘇君|lt=Aso clan|lt_ja=阿蘇氏}}<ref name="kokushi">''{{ill|Kokushi Daijiten Vol. 4 Ki-Ku|ja|#kokushi|lt=Kokushi Daijiten Vol. 4 Ki-Ku|lt_ja=国史大辞典　４　　き〜く}}''.</ref>
|家祖 = {{ill|Hayamikatama-no-Mikoto|ja|速瓶玉命}}
|種別 = {{ill|Kōbetsu|ja|皇別}}
|出身地 = {{ill|Yamato Province|ja|大和国|lt=Ōyamato|lt_ja=大倭国}}
|根拠地 = Aso Province (later {{ill|Aso District|ja|阿蘇郡}} of {{ill|Higo Province|ja|肥後国}})
|人物 =
|支流 = {{ill|Aso clan|ja|阿蘇氏#苗字氏族としての阿蘇氏|lt=Aso clan|lt_ja=阿蘇氏}}
}}
'''Aso no Kuni no Miyatsuko''' (''aso no kuni no miyatsuko'', ''aso kokuzō'') was a {{ill|kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造}} who ruled the region that later became part of {{ill|Higo Province|ja|肥後国}} ('''[[#Territory|Aso Province]]''').

== Overview ==
=== Ancestry ===
*According to the "Kokuzō Hongi" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'', during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Sujin|ja|崇神天皇}} (the 10th {{ill|Emperor|ja|天皇}}), '''{{ill|Hayamikatama-no-Mikoto|ja|速瓶玉命}}''', grandson of '''{{ill|Kamuyaimimi-no-Mikoto|ja|神八井耳命}}''' ({{ill|prince|ja|皇子}} of {{ill|Emperor Jinmu|ja|神武天皇}}, the first emperor) — sharing the same ancestor as the {{ill|Hi no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|火国造}} — was appointed the first Aso no Kuni no Miyatsuko.
*Hayamikatama-no-Mikoto is said to have carried on the will of his father {{ill|Takeiwatatsu-no-Mikoto|ja|健磐龍命}} and devoted himself to spreading {{ill|agriculture|ja|農耕}}, as well as {{ill|animal husbandry|ja|畜産}}, {{ill|silviculture|ja|植林}}, and so forth.<ref name="kokuzou">[http://www.aso-dm.net/?国造神社 Kokuzō Shrine] - Asopedia (accessed 2018-07-25 at 16:00 ([[JST|JST]]))</ref>

=== Clan ===
'''{{ill|Aso clan|ja|阿蘇君|lt=Aso clan|lt_ja=阿蘇氏}}''' (''aso-uji''; {{ill|kabane|ja|カバネ|lt=kabane|lt_ja=姓}} of {{ill|Kimi (kabane)|ja|キミ (カバネ)|lt=Kimi|lt_ja=君}}).<ref name="kokushi"/> Shares the same ancestor as the {{ill|Ō clan|ja|多氏}} and others.

== Base ==
The later {{ill|Higo Province|ja|肥後国}} '''{{ill|Aso District|ja|阿蘇郡}} {{ill|Aso-gō|ja|阿蘇郷}}'''<ref name="chizu">''{{ill|Nihon Rekishi Chizu: Primitive and Ancient Period Vol. 2|ja|#chizu|lt=Nihon Rekishi Chizu: Primitive and Ancient Period Vol. 2|lt_ja=日本歴史地図　原始・古代編　下}}''.</ref>. Present-day Miyaji and Teno, {{ill|Ichinomiya, Kumamoto|ja|一の宮町|lt=Ichinomiya-machi|lt_ja=一の宮町}}, {{ill|Aso, Kumamoto|ja|阿蘇市|lt=Aso City|lt_ja=阿蘇市}} in {{ill|Kumamoto Prefecture|ja|熊本県}}<ref name="chizu"/>. The location of the {{ill|district office|ja|郡衙|lt=gunga|lt_ja=郡衙}} of Aso District is unknown, but according to the ''{{ill|Higo no Kuni Fudoki|ja|肥後国風土記}}'', it was located to the west of {{ill|Aso Shrine|ja|阿蘇神社}}.

Local governments bearing the name "Aso" include the former {{ill|Aso-machi|ja|阿蘇町}} and the present {{ill|Aso, Kumamoto|ja|阿蘇市|lt=Aso City|lt_ja=阿蘇市}}.

=== Territory ===
The territory of the Aso no Kuni no Miyatsuko was the region then called '''Aso Province'''. Aso Province refers to the later {{ill|Aso District|ja|阿蘇郡}}.

The ''{{ill|Tsukushi Fudoki|ja|筑紫風土記}}'' records an {{ill|agata|ja|古代日本の地方官制#県（アガタ）|lt=agata|lt_ja=県（アガタ）}} called '''{{ill|Asō-no-Agata|ja|閼宗県}}''', thought to have been in Aso Province.

The origin of the place name "Aso", according to the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'', lies in the presence of two deities — {{ill|Aso-tsuhiko|ja|阿蘇都彦}} and {{ill|Aso-tsuhime|ja|阿蘇都媛}} — who were also ancestors of the Aso no Kuni no Miyatsuko. See also [http://www.aso-dm.net/?阿蘇の語源 The Etymology of Aso] (in "Asopedia").

{{ill|Hi Province|ja|火国}}, Aso Province, {{ill|Ashikita Province|ja|葦北国}}, {{ill|Matsura Province|ja|末羅国}}, {{ill|Katsutsu Province|ja|葛津国}}, {{ill|Tsukushi-Meda Province|ja|筑志米多国}}, and others were called {{ill|Hi Province|ja|火国|lt=Hi Province (Hi Province)|lt_ja=火国（肥国）}}. Later, with the establishment of {{ill|ritsuryō provinces|ja|令制国}}, these were split into {{ill|Hizen Province|ja|肥前国}} and {{ill|Higo Province|ja|肥後国}}, and the former area of Aso Province became part of Higo Province.

== Tutelary Shrine ==
'''{{ill|Aso Shrine|ja|阿蘇神社}}''', the {{ill|ichinomiya|ja|一宮}} of {{ill|Higo Province|ja|肥後国}}. A shrine in Miyaji, {{ill|Ichinomiya, Kumamoto|ja|一の宮町|lt=Ichinomiya-machi|lt_ja=一の宮町}}, {{ill|Aso, Kumamoto|ja|阿蘇市|lt=Aso City|lt_ja=阿蘇市}} in {{ill|Kumamoto Prefecture|ja|熊本県}}, enshrining {{ill|Takeiwatatsu-no-Mikoto|ja|健磐龍命}}, father of the first Aso no Kuni no Miyatsuko Hayamikatama-no-Mikoto. It is said to have been founded when Hayamikatama-no-Mikoto was commanded by {{ill|Imperial edict|ja|勅|lt=imperial edict|lt_ja=勅}} to enshrine Takeiwatatsu-no-Mikoto in the 6th month of {{ill|Emperor Kōrei|ja|孝霊天皇}} 9.<ref name="gunshi"/>

=== Related Shrines ===
* {{ill|Kokuzō Shrine|ja|国造神社}}
*: A shrine in Teno, Ichinomiya-machi, Aso City, Kumamoto Prefecture. Enshrines the first Aso no Kuni no Miyatsuko Hayamikatama-no-Mikoto as principal deity. Said to have been founded in {{ill|Emperor Sujin|ja|崇神天皇}} 18.<ref name="kokuzou"/> Hayamikatama-no-Mikoto is said to have repaired and rebuilt it by {{ill|imperial command|ja|勅命}} of {{ill|Emperor Keikō|ja|景行天皇}} (the 12th emperor).<ref name="kamishimo"/>

=== Tombs ===
* '''{{ill|Kami-no-Okura Kofun|ja|上御倉古墳|lt=Kami-no-Okura|lt_ja=上御倉}}''' (''kami-no-okura''<ref name="hayamikatakma">[http://www.aso-dm.net/?速瓶玉命%28はやみかたまのみこと%29と国造神社%28こくぞうじんじゃ%29 Hayamikatama-no-Mikoto and Kokuzō Shrine] - Asopedia (accessed 2018-07-26 at 10:52 ([[JST|JST]]))</ref>/''kami-ogura''<ref name="kamishimo">[http://www.aso-dm.net/?上御倉・下御倉古墳 Kami-no-Okura and Shimo-no-Okura Kofun] - Asopedia (accessed 2018-07-26 at 10:54 ([[JST|JST]]))</ref>/''kami-mikura''<ref>[http://www.city.aso.kumamoto.jp/education/cultural-property/list_of_cultural_property/ List of Designated Cultural Properties] - Aso City Homepage (accessed 2018-07-26 at 10:55 ([[JST|JST]]))</ref>)
*: A {{ill|kofun|ja|古墳}} in Teno, Ichinomiya-machi, {{ill|Aso, Kumamoto|ja|阿蘇市|lt=Aso City|lt_ja=阿蘇市}}. Mound diameter 33 meters.<ref name="kamishimo"/> Built in the {{ill|6th century|ja|6世紀}}, with a {{ill|yokoana-shiki-sekishitsu|ja|横穴式石室|lt=yokoana-shiki-sekishitsu|lt_ja=横穴式石室}} as the main component.<ref>[http://www.aso-dm.net/?上御倉古墳 Kami-no-Okura Kofun] - Asopedia (accessed 2018-07-26 at 10:59 ([[JST|JST]]))</ref> Located right next to the [[#Related Shrines|above-mentioned]] Kokuzō Shrine,<ref name="hayamikatakma"/> it is said to be the tomb of that shrine's principal deity Hayamikatama-no-Mikoto (the first Aso no Kuni no Miyatsuko).<ref name="kamishimo"/>
* '''{{ill|Nakadōri Kofun Cluster|ja|中通古墳群}}''' (''nakadōri kofungun'')
*: A {{ill|kofun cluster|ja|古墳群}} in Nakadōri, Ichinomiya-machi, {{ill|Aso, Kumamoto|ja|阿蘇市|lt=Aso City|lt_ja=阿蘇市}}. It emerged in the latter half of the {{ill|4th century|ja|4世紀}},<ref name="kodai">[http://www.aso-dm.net/?古代史 Ancient History] - Asopedia (accessed 2018-07-26 at 10:25 ([[JST|JST]]))</ref> and was constructed from the {{ill|5th century|ja|5世紀}} to the {{ill|6th century|ja|6世紀}}.<ref name="nakadori">[http://www.aso-dm.net/?中通古墳群 Nakadōri Kofun Cluster] - Asopedia (accessed 2018-07-26 at 10:33 ([[JST|JST]]))</ref> According to {{ill|Meiji|ja|明治}}-era investigations, there were said to be at least 14 kofun.<ref name="nakadori"/> Thought to be the tombs of the Aso clan (the clan of the Aso no Kuni no Miyatsuko).<ref name="nakadori"/>
** '''{{ill|Nagame-zuka|ja|長目塚}}''' (''nagamezuka''; also written Nagame-zuka<ref name="gunshi">''{{ill|Aso-gun-shi|ja|#gunshi|lt=Aso-gun-shi|lt_ja=阿蘇郡誌}}''.</ref>)
**: A {{ill|keyhole-shaped kofun|ja|前方後円墳}} within the Nakadōri Kofun Cluster. Mound length 111.5 meters, the largest in Kumamoto Prefecture.<ref name="kodai"/> Said to be the {{ill|burial mound|ja|墳墓}} of the Aso no Kuni no Miyatsuko.<ref name="gunshi"/> The front portion was scraped away for river improvement work, leaving the full length about 50 meters short.<ref name="hayamikatakma"/>

== Descendants ==
* {{ill|Aso clan|ja|阿蘇氏#苗字氏族としての阿蘇氏|lt=Aso clan|lt_ja=阿蘇氏}} (''aso-uji'')
*: Of the same clan relationship as the {{ill|Aso clan as the family of the Aso no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|阿蘇君|lt=Aso clan as the family of the Aso no Kuni no Miyatsuko|lt_ja=阿蘇国造の氏族としての阿蘇氏}}.
== Forged Genealogy: "Ihon Aso Keizu" ==
In {{ill|Shōwa|ja|昭和}} 31 ({{ill|1956|ja|1956年}}), {{ill|Tanaka Takashi|ja|田中卓}} visited the Aso family in Miyaji seeking the Aso clan genealogy. What he was provided was something labeled "gift of Nakada Noritoshi" — the "Ihon Aso Keizu" (Variant Aso Genealogy). Tanaka considered it to have been produced from the mid-Edo period onward, but in reality it was produced by {{ill|Nakada Noritoshi|ja|中田憲信}} in the {{ill|Meiji|ja|明治}} era. Its content, "With Takeihotatsu-no-Mikoto ({{ill|Takeiwatatsu-no-Mikoto|ja|健磐龍命}}) as the ancestor, one line connects through the {{ill|Shinano no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|科野国造}} to the Daihōri family of {{ill|Suwa Taisha|ja|諏訪大社}}, while another connects with the Aso no Kuni no Miyatsuko {{ill|Hayamikatama-no-Mikoto|ja|速瓶玉命}} as ancestor to the Aso Daigūji family" — during which time, the transition from {{ill|Kōri-no-Kami|ja|評}} to "Gun-no-Gitairyō", the change in administrative units from {{ill|kōri|ja|評}} to {{ill|gun|ja|郡}}, the granting of the surname "Uji", and the appointment as "Aso-no-Gūji" — included answers to all questions such as the status of the Aso clan in the ancient ritsuryō system, the beginnings of Aso-no-Gūji, and why the Daigūji family in the medieval period came to call themselves "Uji".

Originally, the genealogy of the Aso clan was included in the ''{{ill|Zoku Gunsho Ruijū|ja|続群書類従}}''. This was a genealogy produced by the time of {{ill|Aso Tomotaka|ja|阿蘇友隆}}, son of {{ill|Aso Tomosada|ja|阿蘇友貞}} — in which, from the legendary ancestor Korehito of the Kamakura period to {{ill|Aso Koremitsu|ja|阿蘇惟光}} and {{ill|Aso Koreyoshi|ja|阿蘇惟善}}, and up to the time of Koreyoshi's son Tomosada, the "Aso Succession Chart" recorded what had been transmitted, to which a divine genealogy from {{ill|Emperor Jinmu|ja|神武天皇}} to Korehito was added. {{ill|Maruyama Kasumi|ja|丸山可澄}} copied it during the {{ill|Jōkyō|ja|貞享}} era.

However, up until the formation of the Aso clan genealogy in the ''Zoku Gunsho Ruijū'', no variant genealogy was particularly known. Had such a detailed variant genealogy existed, it would not have failed to be adopted when the Aso clan genealogy was being produced, and there is no description hinting at a variant genealogy among the medieval Aso documents. In this variant lineage, the notations "gift of Nakada Noritoshi" and "edited by Nakada Noritoshi" are noteworthy, showing that the present variant genealogy was provided from outside.

In Shōwa 58 ({{ill|1983|ja|1983年}}), {{ill|Iida Mizuho|ja|飯田瑞穂}} stated, "In old cases, there are some examples showing the transition of titles from Kuni no Miyatsuko → Gun-no-Toku → Dairyō that caught my eye," and said, "Specialists in genealogy production have existed in every age, and thinking that such a background existed is not far off the mark. There are also scholars like {{ill|Suzuki Matoshi|ja|鈴木真年}}, a {{ill|National Learning|ja|国学}} scholar, who made a name for themselves in that world. The transition Kuni no Miyatsuko → Gun-no-Toku → Dairyō may well have been a reflection of the knowledge and understanding of such people," implying that the variant genealogy was a forged genealogy.

Furthermore, in {{ill|Heisei|ja|平成}} 8 ({{ill|1996|ja|1996年}}), {{ill|Murasaki Machiko|ja|村崎真智子}} denied the credibility of the Ihon Aso Keizu. Murasaki clarified, through classification and lineage analysis of the variant Aso genealogy, that the original variant Aso genealogy begins with the Nakada Noritoshi text of the early Meiji period, and also introduced discussions of the relationship between the Ihon Aso Keizu with some similar parts and the "Shin-shi Keizu" of Suwa. This so-called Shin-shi Keizu was something said to have been discovered at the old Daihōri family of {{ill|Suwa Taisha|ja|諏訪大社}} Kamisha in {{ill|Meiji|ja|明治}} 17 ({{ill|1884|ja|1884年}}); from the supplementary notes of the ''Shūho Suwa-shi Keizu'', {{ill|Takei Yukishige|ja|武居幸重}}'s "Aso-shi Keizu Ikken", {{ill|Miyaji Naoichi|ja|宮地直一}}'s ''Suwa-shi'', and others, Murasaki was forced to conclude that {{ill|Iida Takesato|ja|飯田武郷}}, gūji of Suwa Taisha, drafted the text, and Nakada Noritoshi made it into a genealogy. That is, the Aso no Kuni no Miyatsuko and Shinano no Kuni no Miyatsuko genealogies within the Ihon Aso Keizu contain later forgeries in which Iida and Nakada were involved.

Iida and Nakada, and also Nakada and {{ill|Suzuki Matoshi|ja|鈴木真年}}, were — if the ''{{ill|Wagaku Sōran|ja|和学総覧}}'' is considered — disciples of {{ill|Hirata Tetsutane|ja|平田銕胤}}, a {{ill|National Learning|ja|国学}} scholar. For these National Learning scholars, the history of kōri-gun and their relationship was well-known knowledge from the ''{{ill|Shinpen Hitachi no Kuni Shi|ja|新編常陸国誌}}'' and others. Iida, Nakada, and Suzuki were wary of those who might suspect their forged genealogy. Therefore, they thought that by annotating the forged genealogy with "examples showing the transition of titles from Kuni no Miyatsuko → Gun-no-Toku → Dairyō", the credibility of the genealogy would be enhanced. Indeed, Tanaka, who discovered the Ihon Aso Keizu, carefully examined the genealogy and, knowing that late-{{ill|Edo period|ja|江戸時代}} National Learning scholars had knowledge of {{ill|kōri|ja|評}}, optimistically judged the content of the variant genealogy, saying, "It is not entirely impossible that it was forged, but there is no need to go that far in doubting it."

{{ill|Asoshina Yasuo|ja|阿蘇品保夫}}, who served as director of the Yatsushiro City Museum and chairman of the Kumamoto Prefectural Council for the Protection of Cultural Properties, emphasized the "historical evaluation of the scale" of the Aso clan's existence that Nakada used, and said that within the Aso clan genealogy the reliable part is from {{ill|Aso Korenobu|ja|阿蘇惟宣}} onward, and "The dignity of the Aso clan is not guaranteed by a forged genealogy of the level that Nakada and others produced."<ref>Asoshina Yasuo, ''Asosha to Daigūji: The Medieval Aso (Shizen to Bunka Aso Sensho 2)'' (Kumamoto Nichinichi Shimbun, 1999)</ref> Against this Asoshina view, there has also been a specific response-based rebuttal, "Reading Murasaki Machiko's Article 'A Tentative Discussion of the Variant Aso Genealogy' and Others."

{{ill|Maeda Ryōtarō|ja|間枝遼太郎}} proved that the theory that the {{ill|Aso clan|ja|阿蘇氏}} and {{ill|Shinano no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|科野国造}} clan recorded in the ''Aso-shi Ryakukeizu'' are of the same clan, and the period consistency of offices such as "Kōri-no-Kami", were already denied by earlier scholars' historical examinations, and that the ''Aso-shi Ryakukeizu'' '''does not have the power to clarify the historical facts of antiquity''' as a genealogy.<ref>Maeda Ryōtarō, "The 'Shin-shi Keizu' of the Daihōri Text and the 'Asoke Ryakukeifu' Reconsidered: The Reconstructed Suwa Traditions", ''Kokugo Kokubun Kenkyū'' No. 161 (Hokkaido University National Literature Society, August 2023)</ref>{{main|科野国造}}

== Footnotes ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
=== Citations ===
{{Reflist|2}}

== References ==
* {{Cite book|和書|author=Kokushi Daijiten Editorial Committee|editor=|title={{ill|Kokushi Daijiten|ja|国史大辞典 (昭和時代)|lt=Kokushi Daijiten|lt_ja=国史大辞典}} Vol. 4 Ki-Ku|year=1984|publisher={{ill|Yoshikawa Kōbunkan|ja|吉川弘文館}}|isbn=4642005048|page=p. 843|chapter=|ref=kokushi}}
* {{Cite book|和書|author=|editor={{ill|Kondō Toshitaka|ja|近藤敏喬}}|title=Kodai Gōzoku Keizu Shūran|year=1993|publisher={{ill|Tōkyōdō Shuppan|ja|東京堂出版}}|isbn=4-490-20225-3|pages=pp. 432-433|chapter=|ref=keizu}}
* {{Cite book|和書|author=|editor={{ill|Takeuchi Rizō|ja|竹内理三}} et al.|title={{ill|Nihon Rekishi Chizu|ja|日本歴史地図}}: Primitive and Ancient Period Vol. 2|year=1982|publisher={{ill|Kashiwa Shobō|ja|柏書房}}|isbn=|page=292|chapter=|ref=chizu}}
* {{Cite book|和書|author=|editor=Kumamoto Kyōikukai Aso-gun Shibu|title=Aso-gun-shi|url=https://dl.ndl.go.jp/info:ndljp/pid/980734/162|year=1926|publisher=Kumamoto Kyōikukai Aso-gun Shibu|isbn=|pages=pp. 281, 306|chapter=|ref=gunshi}}Link is to the {{ill|National Diet Library Digital Collection|ja|国立国会図書館デジタルコレクション}}, image 162.

== See also ==
* {{ill|Kuni no miyatsuko|ja|国造#諸国造一覧|lt=Kuni no miyatsuko: list|lt_ja=国造#諸国造一覧}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:あそのくにのみやつこ}}
[[Category:肥後国]]
[[Category:熊本県の歴史]]
[[Category:多氏|#あそのくにのみやつこ]]
[[Category:阿蘇氏|#あそのくにのみやつこ]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:阿蘇国造]]
