{{基礎情報 公家
| 氏名 = Kagawake
| 画像 =
| 画像サイズ =
| 画像説明 =
| 時代 = {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代}}
| 生誕 = Unknown
| 死没 = Unknown
| 改名 =
| 別名 = Kagawake-no-Mikoto, Kannagiwake, Kannagiwake-no-Mikoto, Kagawake-no-Mikoto, Kagawake-no-Ōkimi
| 諡号 =
| 神号 =
| 戒名 =
| 墓所 =
| 官位 = {{ill|Ukita no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|浮田国造}}
| 主君 = {{ill|Emperor Seimu|ja|成務天皇}}, {{ill|Empress Jingū|ja|神功皇后}}, {{ill|Emperor Ōjin|ja|応神天皇}}
| 氏族 = Same clan as {{ill|Kamitsukeno clan|ja|上毛野氏|lt=Kamitsukenu-no-Kimi|lt_ja=上毛野君}} and {{ill|Shimotsukeno clan|ja|下毛野氏|lt=Shimotsukenu-no-Kimi|lt_ja=下毛野君}}, ancestor of {{ill|Kimikobe|ja|吉弥侯部}}
| 父母 =
| 妻   =
| 子   =
| 特記事項 =
}}
'''Kagawake''' (''kagawake''{{Sfn|Kagawake (Ancient Clans)|2010}}, dates of birth and death unknown) was a {{ill|Kofun period|ja|古墳時代}} {{ill|gōzoku|ja|豪族}} transmitted in the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'' and elsewhere — the first '''{{ill|Ukita no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|浮田国造}}'''. A distant ancestor of the {{ill|Kamitsukeno clan|ja|上毛野氏|lt=Kamitsukenu-no-Kimi|lt_ja=上毛野君}} and {{ill|Kimikobe|ja|吉弥侯部}}, he was a {{ill|general|ja|武将}} said to have been dispatched to {{ill|Korea|ja|朝鮮}} in the time of {{ill|Empress Jingū|ja|神功皇后}}. '''Kannagiwake''' (''kannagiwake'', ''kagawake''), dispatched during the reign of {{ill|Emperor Ōjin|ja|応神天皇}}, is regarded as the same person.{{Sfn|Kagawake (Ancient Clans)|2010}} Also known as '''Kagawake-no-Mikoto''' or '''Kagawake-no-Ōkimi'''.

== Records ==
According to the entry for the 3rd month of Empress Jingū 49 in the ''{{ill|Nihon Shoki|ja|日本書紀}}'', he was appointed general together with {{ill|Aratawake|ja|荒田別}} and took part in the campaign against {{ill|Silla|ja|新羅}}. The entry for the 2nd month of Empress Jingū 50 records his return to Japan.

In the same text's entry for the 8th month of {{ill|Emperor Ōjin|ja|応神天皇}} 15, Kannagiwake was dispatched with Aratawake to {{ill|Baekje|ja|百済}}, and the following year brought {{ill|Wani|ja|王仁}} back. This "Kannagiwake" is regarded as the same person as Kagawake.{{Sfn|Kagawake (Ancient Clans)|2010}} In this entry, Aratawake and Kannagiwake are recorded as "ancestors of the Kamitsukenu-no-Kimi."

In the entry on the {{ill|Ukita no Kuni no Miyatsuko|ja|浮田国造}} in the "{{ill|Kokuzō Hongi|ja|国造本紀}}" of the ''{{ill|Sendai Kuji Hongi|ja|先代旧事本紀}}'', "Kagawake-no-Ōkimi", a 5th-generation descendant of Emperor Sujin, is recorded as having been appointed kuni no miyatsuko during the reign of Emperor Seimu.

The name of Kagawake also appears in the episode of the Silla campaign in the ''{{ill|Sumiyoshi Taisha Jindaiki|ja|住吉大社神代記}}''.

== Examination ==
Regarding Kagawake's existence, theories differ as to whether he was a real historical figure based on original sources such as the ''Nihon Shoki'', various genealogies, and the ''{{ill|Baekje-ki|ja|百済記}}'', or a legendary figure added in later times.{{Sfn|Kagawake (Ancient Clans)|2010}}

From the reading "kaga", there is a theory linking him to {{ill|Ashikaga District|ja|足利郡}} in {{ill|Shimotsuke Province|ja|下野国}} (present-day area around {{ill|Ashikaga, Tochigi|ja|足利市|lt=Ashikaga City|lt_ja=足利市}} in {{ill|Tochigi Prefecture|ja|栃木県}}).<ref>Cited in ''Nihon Chiri Shiryō'' (from Chapter 3, Section 4 of ''Studies on Keno Province: Elucidating the Kofun Period, Vol. 2''). Additionally, Kagawake is one theory for the origin of the place name "Ashikaga" ([https://crd.ndl.go.jp/reference/entry/index.php?page=ref_view&id=1000047466 Wanting to know the origin of the place name Ashikaga (Tochigi Prefectural Ashikaga Library response)] (Collaborative Reference Database)).</ref>

== Footnotes ==
{{脚注ヘルプ}}
{{reflist}}

== References ==
* {{Cite book|和書|editor=|author=|year=2010|chapter=Kagawake|title=Nihon Kodai Shizoku Jinmei Jiten: Popular Edition|publisher={{ill|Yoshikawa Kōbunkan|ja|吉川弘文館}}|isbn=978-4642014588|ref={{Harvid|Kagawake (Ancient Clans)|2010}}}}

== See also ==
* {{ill|List of Figures from before the Asuka Period|ja|飛鳥時代以前の人物一覧}}
* {{ill|Kamitsukeno clan|ja|上毛野氏}}

{{DEFAULTSORT:かかわけ}}
[[Category:日本神話の人物]]
[[Category:古墳時代の人物]]
[[Category:古代日本の人物]]
[[Category:陸奥国の人物]]
[[Category:福島県の歴史]]
[[Category:上毛野氏|伝かかわけ]]
[[Category:古代日朝関係]]
[[Category:Kuni no miyatsuko]]
[[ja:鹿我別]]
